Michael Sinkinson: This paper
is about common ownership in America, 1980 to 2017. Many of you have probably
heard something about the common ownership hypothesis. It's been in the news
quite a fair bit. But just to make sure we're
all clear on the idea, economics usually
starts with the premise that firms maximize profits. It's a very basic
underlying assumption to most of what we do. It's very natural that
they would do this. You would want to do this
if you were a private firm. If you're a public firm, you also want to do this because maximizing profits
will maximize the share price as that reflects
discounted future profits. But another way to
think about this is that you really do answer to your investors and
that's what we teach our MBAs at business schools. The management is responsible
to your investors and what are your
investors want? Well, it might be the case that some large investors may hold stakes in you and
your competition. We call those common owners. For example, if I
have a big stake in Uber and a big stake Lyft, I don't want them spending
a lot of money poaching drivers from each other or poaching riders from each other. The idea here is a common
owner may not actually want you to solely
profit maximize, they may want you
to something more like industry profit maximize. This paradigm says, well
maybe actually what firms do is they maximize the shareholder portfolio value. It's a one little
tweak and assumption, and as you'll see, you get a lot out of this one little tweak. Now this has been in the news a lot lately with sensationalist
headlines as well. Things like are index funds
evil or stealth socialism. The idea there is because
we're all putting our retirement funds in these big index funds
like we've been told to, that we're creating a problem. Because we're all indexing, we're buying the
market we're creating this common ownership idea and it may be resulting
in less competition. I want to focus on this last
quote here from Reuters, "When BlackRock calls, CEOs listen and do deals." BlackRock is of course
one of the largest asset management
firms in the world. People often question around this common ownership
hypothesis. They say, well,
how would you know these investment
management firms actually communicate their
desires with management? Well, just ask
them what they do. There's no CEO that
doesn't return our call because typically we're high up on the
shareholder register. At the very bottom it says we are everybody's
largest shareholder. This is the common
ownership hypothesis in a nutshell and
it's a concern. We have been thinking
about this problem for a few years now and developed many agenda around studying this common
notion hypothesis. The first output of it was a Brookings Institute
working paper, where we basically
do a lit review of the existing evidence, because there has been some empirical
evidence purporting to find effects of common
ownership on prices. The main point of
that paper is to basically show all the
data issues that exist, survey what methods are
currently being used, and to basically point out why industrial
organization economists are so-called cranky about the existing empirical evidence. IO is sometimes known as
cranky about a lot of things, but in particular
in this context, IO has had a lot of problems
with the existing evidence. Most of today I'm going to spend talking of a macro-level view of what do these common
ownership incentives look like in the economy? We're going to look
at the S&P 500 over the past almost 40 years and
try and figure this out. What's nice is we're
going to look at this very differently from
the existing literature. Then we're going to just focus
on the firm's incentives. Just write down the
firm's objective function and figure out where the common ownership
incentives show up. We're going to then decompose
some long-term trends in this and show you what's
been going on. Then I'm just going to advertise
that we're still working on a formal testing procedure to actually go to the data in differentiated
product markets and actually assess whether
it looks like there's evidence of common
ownership affecting prices. I will not have time
to get to that today, but I want to advertise, look for it in the
next few months, we should have that
working paper out. Just a quick preview what
we're going to find. We do think the series, it's a self-consistent theory. It actually makes
sense in some ways. There's a bit of some questions around
corporate governance though, and we'll discuss
those in this talk. One thing we want to emphasize, don't regress
equilibrium object like price on other equilibrium
objects such as MHHI. That's a bad idea
and I'll show you exactly why that's a bad
idea in a couple of slides. We instead study what
we call the profit weights that are implied
by common ownership. We're going to develop
that in a few slides. In terms of the
facts I'm going to show you from this paper, it's no surprise that
institutional ownership is growing overall.
We know that. But we're going to show
you that the implied profit weights that we compute for companies
in the S&P 500, have been increasing
greatly over time. From 0.2-0.7, you'll understand in a few
slides what that means. What is happening here. A lot of those sensationalist
articles have tried to blame Vanguard or BlackRock
or State Street and said they're the problem,
that's what's going on. But as we show, no, they're just the
latest incarnation of a trend towards indexing. It used to be the case
that you'd make a bet. You'd say, I think Eastern Airlines is really going to win. I'm going to buy a big
stake in Eastern Airlines. Today we know Warren Buffett has large stakes in every airline. It's this move towards
diversification that's really going on. We then try and
quantify the effects. We basically calibrate
a model and say, well, let's turn this on. Let's assume everyone
was being competitive in their pricing and
then flip a switch and have them wake up
and decide the price, taking into account this idea of maximizing
shareholder portfolios. The answer is, it's
big. Markups would increase pretty significantly, I'll show you exactly
how much but more than double over the 40 year period. Then finally, we also
show that if there's, say, a privately held firm, a maverick as we're calling it, if one firm is not going along with the common
ownership in some sense, that can actually do a ton to discipline this whole effect. The fact that more of the economic
activity is going on in private companies over time, might be a good
sign that we need to worry less about this. Let me dive right in. The theory actually goes
back to the '80s and '90s. But really why this took off and why the newspapers
are paying attention was a set of papers that
purported to find price effects in
airlines and banks. That's the second bullet point. That has just
unleashed a torrent of new work on this whole topic. We've seen replies
to those papers, replies to those replies. We've seen papers
proposing remedies. We should rein in index funds. That's quite an extreme idea. We've also seen papers start to think about, well, maybe
it's not in price, maybe it's in
investment decisions or R&D or something else. It's been a very active area of research. Let me
just go through. This is about the
only equation slide. Let me just walk through what is this model and what does it imply? Here's a little notation. Investor s in firm f has
rights to profits Beta_fs. Think of that as what percent
of the company do you own. If you have five
percent of the shares, you have a claim to five
percent of profits. Therefore, your investor
portfolio is worth the sum across all of your
investments of that Beta times that
company's profits. That's just your
portfolio value. Here's the first problem
with the theory. I have many investors and they
have different portfolios. They might disagree on what I should do in a given situation. To be concrete, suppose investor a owns a
lot of American, a little United, and investor b owns a little American,
a lot of United. Well, if you're American,
those two investors would disagree on
what you should do. We have to resolve
this in some way. The way this is done is with a Pareto weight Gamma
on each investor. I say, I care Gamma
about investor a's portfolio. We'll
come back to that. But now that we have
these ingredients, we can just directly
write out what is this firm's
objective function? What are they
trying to maximize? They're maximizing again, just the investor's
portfolio values. If you write it out,
it's the sum across all my shareholders of Gamma, how much I care about them, times their portfolio's value. That's not a very
nice expression. Let's rearrange a little bit.
I'm going to just pull out my own profit and divide
by its coefficient to normalize.  If you go
down a line, you see what I really want to do is want
to maximize my own profit, that's the Pi f plus some weird weighted average
of other firms' profits. In that weird weighting
thing in front, that's what we're going to
call the profit weight Kappa. The reason being is if
you go to the right side, it all of a sudden has a
very nice interpretation. I maximize my own profits plus the Kappa weighted sum
of other firms' profits. What's great about this is it prices other
firms' profits. This is my objective function. This tells me that
if Kappa is say, 0.2 that if I can make one dollar
appear in your profits, it's worth 20 cents
in my profits. It gives me the price
of your profits in terms of mine, very
natural interpretation. How do we actually
compute these? What is Beta? This
is the good one. We know what Beta
is pretty clearly because large investors
have to file what they hold every quarter with the SEC in these form 13f filings. Beta is just what percent of the firm do you
actually control. Mostly observable in data,
not too controversial. Far more controversial is
this Gamma thing. It's fundamentally a model
of corporate governance. How much do I care about each of my investors portfolios? Theory gives us very
little to go on here. But it does seem like there are a few obvious nice properties
that we should have. For example, Gamma should
be increasing in Beta. The more you own of me, the more I should care
about your portfolio. Seems fine. We think that Gamma should go to zero as Beta goes to
zero so you don't have weird discontinuities if I buy one share of your company. The literature to this
point generally waves its hands at this problem
and says we're going to assume what's called
a proportional control. We're going to set
Gamma equal to Beta. If you own five percent of me, I care five percent about you. It has some very nice math, but there's no real foundation to that. It is an assumption. What we do is we actually
don't impose that, we allow for more flexible forms of Gamma being a
function of Beta. What we do is we test
a range basically. As you can see, we
do square root Beta, Beta, Beta squared. As you go to the
right in that list, you're basically overweighting
your largest investors. If I put Gamma
equals Beta squared, I'm caring just about
my biggest investors. If I go to the other
end, square root Beta, I'm underweighting my
largest investors. This gives us flexibility around what this actual
function should be. I just want to point
out on a few things. Unlike these MHHIs that
have been used so far, these Kappas that we're studying have a
lot of advantages. I didn't have to specify a game. I didn't have to say
what a market was. These are just very
nice primitive objects in the firm's
objective function. We think this is
the right way to study this question
as opposed to what other papers have
been doing so far. I just want to drive
home an example of why you should not regress
price on MHHI. What we do in the paper is a really simple simulation
exercise where we say, imagine we have linear
demand and two firms, and they're just
going to set prices according to the
static Bertrand-Nash. They're going to ignore
common ownership and pricing. They're not doing any of
this common ownership stuff. But we're going to assume
that we're sampling from across markets and
there's variance in the a_1 term across markets. That's where we have
differences across markets. We have one
institutional investor. Rather than just
compute the HHI, the MHHI from these samples
and see what we get. Here's our little simulation. The figure on the left shows prices across markets as a function of that
demand intersect. The X-axis is the
demand intersect, the Y-axis is prices. What you see is prices are
increasing to the right. We then plot the MHHI
Delta in the right figure. It's this parabola shape. It's rising and then falling. Now, remember, firms are ignoring common
ownership entirely. But notice the
little green bars, we're going to call
that Sample 1. If those are the markets you
happen to sample and you ran a regression of prices which
are increasing on MHHID, which is increasing, you get a strong significant
coefficient. If you instead drew Sample 2, the yellow bars, prices are still increasing, but now you'd get a negative
coefficient in MHII Delta. It's really a
meaningless to do this. The market shares are
confounding everything here. You don't want to include market shares on your right-hand side. Again, this is why we think
we need to be studying this Kappa object,
not anything else. Let me go to some main results. What we do is we
actually compute this Kappa variable
for universe of S&P 500 firms from 1980-2017. It's going to be
pairwise. We're going to have an awful lot
of these Kappas. For every pair of firms, we look at the overlap in
the investor portfolios. We think this is useful
because the S&P 500 is chosen to be representative
of the US economy. It's a proprietary list maintained by
Standard and Poor's, but they actually
do try and make it look like the US economy. So we think this
is representative. Again, I'm not making direct claims and outcomes
yet. I'll come back to this. Some of these pairs of firms
will be that Delta Airlines has a profit weight on
Pfizer, which is silly. We understand that concern,
we'll come back to that. We can show lots of
robustness to that. But this is the headline result. What do these Kappas
look like over time. I want to focus first
on just the red line, just to fix ideas. The different lines are
just different models of that Gamma parameter. But if you look at the red
line, it goes from 0.2 in 1980 to about 0.7 in 2017. That's a huge increase,
more than tripling, of this profit
weight that I put on a typical other firm in the S&P 500 over this time period. One thing we really, really
like about this picture is, notice that, for 2017, it doesn't matter which Gamma
specification you pick. I can overweight my big
investors or underweight them, it's still going
to be about 0.7. It's just because everyone's holding the market portfolio. It's not about who I'm actually putting weight
on so much anymore. This is first main result. Qualitatively, it doesn't
matter which Gamma you choose. Quantitatively for 2017, it doesn't matter which
Gamma you choose, they're all going to
be the same answer. I'm going to just
mention quickly, there are a lot of data issues. I'm not going to have
time to go through this given the time allotment. But if you are interested
to work with this data, our Brookings Paper has
a huge data section that summarizes
all the problems. I'm trying to skip
a few slides and say what is driving
that increase in Kappa? Well, we just went and
computed similarity measures between investor portfolios
and the market portfolio. We have an L_1 measured
and L_2 measure, plotted them over time, and it's just because
everyone's portfolio start to look more and more like
the market portfolio. This is the main driver
of what's going on. Just to emphasize this point, this started in 1981. There's no way this increase
was all of a sudden in 2000 because BlackRock acquired
iShares or something. It was not some step function, it was a very smooth
increase over time. We wanted to understand
how big this could be in terms of effects on, say, prices in markets. We just calibrated
a simple model with eight symmetric firms and
we have logit demand. If you're not aware of it, there's an excellent
paper by Jan De Loecker and Jan Eeckhout about the
rise of markups over time. What we do is we calibrated the 1980 value to their markup. We basically just then
said, "Okay firms, behave as if common
ownership is real and Kappa is increasing," as we see it increasing
in the data. That is basically the blue line. You see that markups go from about 20 percent to
about 55, 0.2-0.55. We also put on the red line, that is the markup increase that De Loecker and Eeckhout
document in their paper. There has been
some debate around that paper about whether
it's measured properly, etc., but just to give a
sense of the magnitudes, it looks like these Kappa
incentives are big and could actually
match the magnitude at the end of that sample. We're not saying these two lines lie on top of each other, I want to be clear about
that, but we do want to put that up there
for comparison. Another thing we did
is, we looked at profits of these firms
relative to competition. The blue line is, if you
have these Kappas and you're actually behaving according to the common ownership model, and then we added a maverick
firm and basically said, let's have one private
firm in the market. That firm's not going to play along with the common ownership. Hypothesis, that firm is
going to have a Kappa of zero and every other firms are going to have a
Kappa of zero on them. If you do that, we find it just greatly disciplines
this whole effect. Now, part of that could be
because it's symmetric firms. You can quibble
about the details, but it does seem to be the case, that if you have foreign firms, if you have private
firms, they may act as discipliners in terms of
the ability to do this. As I said, the S&P 500
is big and diverse. What does it mean for
an airline to have a profit weight on a drug company
or something like that? In the paper, we
actually do this within SIC code and
across SIC code. It's actually slightly
higher within SIC code, if anything else. We've also explicitly
done some [inaudible] We did commercial banks,
we did airlines. We've done ready-to-eat cereal. We feel it's pretty robust to different things
around the edges like that. What we also do in the
paper is we look at what are some of the
determinants of these Kappas? We find that higher retail
share means higher Kappa. The reason being,
retail investors fall out of this whole model. Your Beta is very small and your Kappa is very, very small. Retail investors don't matter even if they're undiversified, and so firms of high retail share tend
to have a high Kappa. That's generally correlated with market cap and so
similar result there. The last big thing I
want to talk about is the relationship to tunneling. I'm not sure how familiar
people in the room with the literature on tunneling. But the idea arises when
you have a divorce between cashflow rights and
control rights. This is commonly
thought to occur in a lot of developing
countries where if you have high control rights and high cash flow
rates in the other, you use the control rights to tunnel profits to
the other firm. In the US it's not
supposed to happen, although people have
mentioned the word when Tesla bought Solar City or when Elon Musk's
The Boring Company built it's tunnel
on SpaceX land. You have these weird
relationships. What's amazing is in our case, it's actually possible to have
a Kappa greater than one. There's nothing about the
math that precludes it. What does it mean
to have a Kappa greater than one
for another firm? It means you actually do want
to tunnel profits to them. If Kappa gets high enough, you want to just shut
down, maybe even. But in some sense,
Kappa greater than one seems like a
risk for tunneling. The last thing we do in the
paper is we just say, "Well, how often is Kappa
greater than one among S&P 500 firms during
this time period?" This is one way
where the choice of Gamma does matter a little bit. But let's just pick
the red line again, which is the
[inaudible] control. It's something like 10 percent of our Kappas are
greater than one. That's pretty remarkable. If you do take this
whole model seriously, this is a pretty important
implication. Let me wrap up. This is the main paper that
we're presenting here. The big takeaways are that
this is an interesting model. There's a bit of a
whole new sense of the corporate governance side of how does it all fit together. But the implications are huge and it's not a crazy assumption, you just think that
firms are maximizing shareholder portfolio value. Once you do that, you get
these incentive terms, these Kappa weights
that you can plot. We do that, and we
find that they've been increasing
dramatically over time. It's not because of any one particular investor
or anything like that, it's just because of everyone's buying the market like
we've been told to do. In terms of magnitudes,
from 0.2-0.7 is very big. One nice feature, a maverick
could discipline pricing. Then as I just mentioned, there's some red flags
around this tunneling issue. I'm out of time,
I'm not going to talk about the serial paper, but if you're interested again, we are investigating
how to actually test this in a differentiated
product setting. It's progressing slowly as
structural I/O work tends to. The initial evidence
that we're finding, we have some more basic models, we're adding more layers
of complexity, but so far, we're finding support for the standard competitive model among ready-to-eat
cereal products. Very preliminary. We look for a working paper in another few months.
Thank you very much. 