Yishay Yafeh: When you
look at the OECD countries outside the US, I guess, defined contribution
pension funds are becoming increasingly common and
according to some estimates, are managing something like
$25 trillion in assets. In many OECD countries, what you typically have
is a pension fund or some retirement
savings scheme which manages the entire savings of an individual for retirement. This is somewhat in
contrast with, I guess, the locals are used to where you either have or often have an employer on pension plan like the General Motors pension
plan or something, or a mix of mutual funds, which together make up
a retirement account. But so, the setup
we are thinking of is where you have
a pension plan or a pension manager who manages an individual's
entire savings account. The question in this paper is, how can regulators or the government make sure
that these managers of pension funds are
doing what is best for savers, that is. You can think of a
variety of tools, fiduciary duties, limitations on investment
in certain asset classes, but the focus of this paper
is on the latter two, regulation of fee structure
and the extent to which pension funds or
retirement savings plans are exposed to competition. If you look at unregulated
money management schemes, VC, private equity, hedge funds, etc, then fees are nearly always
based on performance, 20 percent of profits, etc. But in the regulated money management industry
that applies to US mutual funds and to
pension funds more or less in all OECD countries
with two exceptions, fees are always based on assets under management rather
than performance. This has a historical origin
in 1940 law in the US, which was based on fear of excessive risk-taking and is spread more or less throughout
the developed world. I'll skip the details. If there are no
incentive-based fees and fees are based on
assets under management, then presumably,
competition should provide incentives
for fund managers. If you do well, you will
get an inflow of funds, assets under
management will go up and fees will go up as well. Does this work in
the literature? We'll talk about this briefly later, but empirically speaking, it's very hard to find
a setup where you can actually compare
competition and incentives, because in most countries
you do not have both. The extent to which
incentive fees can be used in pension funds or regulated money
management industries is limited and this is actually what we tried to
do in this paper. We use a regulatory
experiment from Israel, which basically imposes an
exogenous variation in the fee structure
and the extent to which funds are exposed
to competition. We basically observe
different funds managed by the same
management companies. Each one of them or
three types of funds, each one faces a
different degree of competition in incentives
and without going into the details of the
historically experiment that brought us to this environment, it's
totally exogenous. It's based on the date at
which the fund was set up. We look at these three types of funds for more or less
a decade and compare their performance
in order to see the outcome that is
associated with incentives, the outcomes that are associated with a competition and so on. The three types of
funds very briefly, maybe we'll go into
the details later. The oldest type, we call it
Old Life Insurance or OLI were set up in the '90s and are basically the
management company. I'm talking about fees to the management company,
not to individuals. The management company
gets fees, which are basically, a fraction
of the ROE returns, 15 percent of the profits. There is no competition in this industry because of
some switching costs, so basically, these are funds where you have very
powerful incentives, and no competitive pressures. Again, the details may be later and we observe eight
of these funds. In 2004, the general
accepted line of thinking that such a fund or a such a fee structure might induce excessive risk-taking, lead regulators to
close these funds to new savers so old savers could
continue to saving them. But new ones had to go into a new fund setup by the
same management company, which is essentially
identical except for the fact that fees are based
on assets under management. These are called New Life
Insurance plans or NLI. For reasons that I won't go
into there are switching costs going in and out of these new life
insurance plans. These are essentially
going to be my benchmark. No competition because of
these switching costs or limited competitive pressures and no incentive-based fees. Then there is a third
variation, the provident funds, which are closest perhaps
to US mutual funds. The fees are based
on assets under management and the technical switching costs that exists in the New Life Insurance
industry don't exist there, so savers can move in and out. You'll have assets
or fees which are not based on profits
or incentives, but with competition. We observe eight of the
old type and nine of the new type of which
eight are managed by the same companies
and one extra. Then providence funds, some of them are managed by the same eight
management companies or insurance companies
and then some others. That's basically the game. We're going to compare them. A preview of the results in case I don't get
to the details. We basically find that
the old funds with incentives outperformed
the new funds, both in terms of ROE returns and in terms of
risk-adjusted returns, alphas, that is. They are not
necessarily associated with higher risk as
regulators would fear. That depends a little bit
on how you measure risk. Competition or provident
funds does not generate the same
outcome as incentives. One conclusion that
we would like to cautiously draw or propose
is that in this setup, competition and incentives
are not perfect substitutes, unlike the basic Mickey
Mouse principal agent that we love and teach. We'll see later if
you believe it. If you believe it,
then this might cause some doubts about the
prevailing regulatory regime. Maybe there is a trade-off
between preventing risk in the short run and the long
term well-being of savers. Maybe the prohibition of incentive fees is not
such a great idea. See at the end if
you believe this. I don't have time to give you a proper tour of the literature
and I'm sure some of you here know this
literature better than I do since I come from
corporate finance, not asset pricing, but basically, a host of
papers on US mutual funds, since pension funds of this type are not really
present in the US. The bottom line of this is that incentives may be
desirable theoretically, empirically, it's hard to test. There are some exceptions
which we may talk about later. The effect of competition on fund management is really a mix. There is a host of
lower fees perhaps, but a host of problems herding, excessive risk-taking
for a variety of reasons and savers who don't
know what they're doing. The effect of
competition is unclear. This is where we start. This is the sample. You have the eight old
life insurance plans with incentives and
no competition. That's the top-right corner. You have the new ones, nine of them very limited competition and
no incentive fees in the provident funds. Assets under management
is the basis for incentives and
competitive pressures. We want to see if the old
funds take more risk. We want to see if the old funds, because of incentives,
do better in some sense, and we want to see if competition
yields good outcomes, as we are trying
to believe from, I guess, the first-class
in economics. Here, it's the first table
I'm going to show you. From left to right, these are the three
types of funds. In the first column, you basically see that the
old funds are much bigger. They started earlier. We're going to control for
size in whatever we do. It's not going to
be just because of more attention being
paid to the older funds. The next column is average
ROE monthly returns. Hiring the old ones, then in the new ones
which are roughly equivalent to the
provident funds. I'm skipping one column. The first measure of risk, the standard deviation or
volatility of monthly returns, essentially identical
across all types and fees, provident funds
with competition. Cheaper this may be
an overestimate of the effect but I don't have
time to go into the details. Another measure of risk. How badly did they do in 2008? Again no indication that the
old ones declined by MOA. The one thing where the old
funds may be perceived as on one reason as riskier is because they invest more
in illiquid assets. Real estate, private equity, non-traded loans, etc, perhaps to take advantage
of the liquidity premium, perhaps because they have an incentive to look
for these investment, this causes some issues in the measurement of
risk-adjusted returns. I'll come back to that later. In red, the old funds
investing about twice as much as the other types
in these illiquid assets. Then we run some risk
and return regressions. I'll skip this in
order to get to the interesting tables,
but basically up to here, raw returns tend to be
hiring the old funds. They are not riskier except for the issue of
illiquid assets, and competition does not seem to generate the same
results as incentives. Then we go into the controversial
measurement of alphas. I'm sure we'll talk about how
alphas should be measured. Five risk factors which represent the asset classes
in which these funds invest. For each fund, we divide the sample period
into four sub samples. We calculate four
alphas for each fund, on the basis of
these risk factors, this is what you get. On the left-hand side, the R-squared of
these alphas tend to be above 90 percent, so we do capture much of
the variation in risk. The actual levels of alphas in column 2 are much
higher than what you're used to seeing in equity only American
mutual funds. We can talk about why
this may be the case. My point here is the relative
comparison between them, since all of them may be biased upwards relative to
American mutual funds. Old life insurance plans
have higher alphas then the new life insurance
plans and also their alphas are more
statistically significant. That's Column 3.
I'll skip the rest. Then we're on regressions
where the dependent variable for each fund, these alphas that
were calculated. On the right-hand side, you
have controls for size, control for management company, fixed effects for the period in which alpha was
calculated, et cetera. The omitted category here is the new life insurance plans. The ones with no incentive
and no competitive pressures, and you find that if
you look at Column 1, old life insurance plans have higher alphas relative
to the omitted category. Provident funds with competitive pressures
have lower alpha. To take into account
the issue of the illiquid assets, for which we don't have a
measure of returns, so we can't include it in
the calculation of alpha, but we can include
the fraction of the portfolio invested in this asset class
starting in 2008, so not right from the beginning. When we include this
look at column 3, there is a positive correlation between investment and
illiquid assets and alpha, but even controlling
for this you still have a positive alpha for the old life insurance plans relative to the
omitted category. The new ones, it's about 70 percent of what
you get in column 1. Column 2 is basically the same sample
period as Column 3. Basically, some of it is due to the illiquid assets
and some of it is left even when you control for this as best as we
thought we could. I think I like this one. These are the eight managers, in red, the alpha for
the old life insurance, and in blue or gray whatever
you want to call this color, the alpha for the
new life insurance managed by the same company. In all eight of them the old
ones have higher alphas. The probability this is
like tossing a coin. A times the
probability that this is random is very close to zero. I won't have time
to go into this. There are quibbles about
alpha and alpha is the best measure
to capture this, maybe we can talk
about this later or during the Q&A period then, a host of robustness tests or alternative ways
for calculating alpha using fewer risk factors or an alternative to the
way it's calculated. Basically, you get
the same results. Yes, I will be done
in five minutes. The old life insurance always outperformed
the omitted category, and the provident funds with competitive pressures
tend to underperform. I won't go through all of these. Let me just tell you
what I think this means. Well, we'll wait for to hear
what my discussing things. But I think the nice thing about this paper is the
regulatory experiment, which provides an
opportunity to compare the different structures without issues related to
sample selection. If you take the results
literally then perhaps regulators who do not like risk in the short run or during
their term in office, should consider alternative
ways of limiting risk taking rather than the
prohibition of incentives. Perhaps control risk in other
ways because it seems like incentives in fund management are maybe good for
savers in the long run. We can talk about the
reasons for this. But if you just look at the
outcomes or the equilibrium, it seems like competition
does not generate the same equilibrium outcome
as incentive-based funds. I'm sure we'll talk about
why this may be the case. At least the view that
competition and incentives are substitutes that should
achieve the same thing, should be, I guess, question
when you see these numbers. I'm reaching the end.
My point is in all of this was not to present
firm conclusions. Just to raise some doubts or questions about whether
it's obvious that the prevailing
regulatory regime around the world to quote
Andrea, is optimal. If I've managed to make you
think that maybe it's not so clear that this is really optimal then
this is all live. I've been trying to achieve. 