Tyler Muir: Let me start with
the main research question that we're after in this paper. What we want to know is, how much variation in
aggregate risk premia, can we ascribe to
intermediaries? By intermediaries, we mean
banks, investment banks, hedge funds, rather
than to households. The two things I
want to highlight here is what we're
going to be focusing on aggregate risk premia, risk premia across
broad asset classes. Then there's rather
than households, really think of rather than aggregate
fluctuations in risk aversions. Let me try to make
this concrete. We know that period of poor health for financial
intermediaries, for financial institutions, times when they
get into trouble, tend to be times when
risk premia very high. But those are also times likely when aggregate risk
aversion is probably high. It's going to be hard to separate what's coming from
which of those two channels. To give them a very
specific example, here's the financial crisis. I have just a couple of
measures of risk premia. I have an MBS spread, a corporate default spread, and the dividend yield
for the stock market. You can see all of these
measures of risk premia spiking dramatically in the
middle of the crisis. Now, there are multiple
stories that you could tell, but the two that we're going to really am thinking
about here is, one story is that large financial institutions got into significant trouble
in the financial crisis. Their risk-bearing
capacity was impaired, and that's what's driving up risk premia in this episode. Now, of course,
at the same time, it's very likely that aggregate risk
aversion also moved. You could think
about that in the context of specific models, let's say Habits Model
consumption is falling, so risk aversion
would be rising. Or if you want to
think about sentiment, people are becoming overly pessimistic for possibly
behavioral reasons. But it's very
likely that both of these two things were going on, so it's not clear
how to interpret this coordinated rise in risk premia cross
those asset classes. What we're going to
do in this paper to try to get at this issue, is we're going to argue that intermediary risk
appetite should matter more for assets that are more difficult for households
directly invest in, and household risk appetite should matter less
for these assets. It's going to deal with the fact that the two measures that
we're going to use of intermediary distress and unobserved
household risk aversion are likely positively
correlated. We're going to show you
this in the context of a model that this is
theoretically justified. The model is going
to nest the simple version of the two main views. It's going to allow for
household risk aversion to change over time or
aggregate risk aversion, and in intermediary
risk aversion. We won't say much about
it in a talk right now, but the existing
tests that we have don't quite get
at this question. One needs to look at
this relative variation and risk premia across
the asset classes. Then I'll show you evidence
that across asset classes, measures of financial sector
health predict returns more strongly in
these asset classes that are difficult for
households to invest in. Think of things like credit default swaps versus
the overall stock market. We'll look at a couple
of household measures, we'll show you that those have the exact opposite pattern. They predict more
for assets that are easier to invest
in, and vice versa. So far, all I'm talking about is variation in risk aversion. You might be worried about
time variation and risk. We can control
observable variation and risks in terms
of volatility, skewness and beta will show that time variation and that is not what's going on in terms
of explaining the result. The bottom line is
going to be that intermediaries in
households appear to have sizable but distinct
effects on risk premium. I'll show you a
number of results, but the main result will
look something like this. I have the future returns on asset class I on
the left-hand side, those are going
to be normalized. I'll tell you how we do that
normalization in a second. I have measures of intermediary health on the right-hand side. The leverage factor that I've used for broker-dealers before, and this net worth
of primary dealers. But just think of
that as a measure of intermediary health
predicting returns. Then we're going to
look at the pattern of these coefficients
across assets, where we're ranking them, by how intermediated they are or how specialized they are, with stocks left and
then CDS on the right. Then we're going
to be arguing that this increasing pattern
of coefficients is suggestive that
intermediaries are mattering more for
these asset classes. I'll show you the same thing
when I include proxies for household risk aversion
and we'll have the exact opposite
pattern downward-sloping. Then we're going to
use that to try to decompose the volatility of risk premia in
these asset classes and we can ascribe
to households, which I'm plotting in red, and then intermediaries which
I'm plotting in the blue. We're going to be using this
diff-in-diff approach here. These are all lower bounds
in each asset class. The lower bound for stocks for intermediaries
is going to be zero because that's what I'm
going to base it off of as the least
intermediate assets. Then I'm just going to be using how much more are these measures predict in CDS than
stocks to try to get it, this variation for
households is going to be the opposite pattern. A sizable amount
of variation and risk premia is
attributable to each one, and in the way
you'd expect based on these asset classes. Just to talk a little bit
briefly about the literature, what we know so far is aggregate asset prices
are consistent with the idea that institutions or intermediaries might matter, but most of those
tests are Euler equation tests
about intermediary first-order conditions. They can't tell you how much
of this risk premia you can ascribe across these
asset classes. We also have a lot of local
evidence that intermediaries matter for particular
asset prices at particular points in time. But it's still not
clear how much they matter broadly for these
aggregate asset prices. Let me just highlight
the basic ideas before I go into the model. We're going to have time-varying risk appetite
of intermediaries, which I'm going to
call Gamma I.t. Same with household
risk aversion Gamma H. t. The question that we want to know
is whether or not in this regression here, Beta I, the loading for the risk aversion
for intermediaries is bigger than zero. I'll talk about this
normalization that we have on the left-hand side in a second. The problem is
going to be we only observe some proxy for Gamma i, and likely that
proxy is going to be positively correlated with Gamma h. That's what I
showed you in the beginning. Everyone's going to get into
bad times at the same time. The way we're going to
try to overcome this is arguing that households face different frictions to
invest in each asset class. Beta i, H is going to be weakly decreasing as we go from less to more
intermediate assets, then I can tell
whether or not that Beta i is different
from zero, is positive. The model is going to
look something like this. It's going to be
really simple just to lay out these issues. For now, think of two assets, we're going to have N assets. Asset 1, think of it as
something like the stock market, something that's easy for households to
invest in an asset, to think of some more
complex asset class, that's going to be
harder for households to invest in directly. We're going to
capture that through these costs, C1 and C2. Think of C1 as being low and
C2 as being much higher. The household can directly
invest in asset 1, but it's costly or to
invest in asset 2. We're going to have
household risk aversion Gamma h and intermediary
risk aversion Gamma i. This is going to be a
CARA normal framework. There are going to be two
frictions going on here. The first friction
is that, as I said, assets are going
to differ in their ease of direct investment. The way that we're going
to capture that is with this quadratic cost C, which might differ
across different assets. The second friction is
that intermediaries are going to invest on
behalf of households, but possibly with different
investment policies. They're going to have a
different risk aversion, potentially Gamma I, that might be different from Gamma H. Notice here in
the households problem, they're taking
into account D_ I, so they're taking into
account that they own the intermediary and are getting risk exposure
through them. But it might be costly for them to go around and directly invest in these asset
classes that they want to. The second friction is going to be that there's
potentially a wedge in preferences that
intermediaries are not going to act as a
veil but invest exactly as households want
them to in the model. The key outcome of
the model is going to be this relative
predictability. It's going to be easy to jump from those to
the equilibrium. I'll just jump to
what the model says about this empirical test. The model is going to say that something pretty intuitive, which is that the change in
risk premia for asset class I with respect to a change in intermediary risk
aversion Gamma I. That's always going to
be weekly increasing. Increase in risk aversion is going to weekly
increase risk premia. But it's going to depend
crucially on this C_ i, the cost across the
different asset classes. Similarly, for household
risk aversion, when I change household
risk aversion, risk premia also going to rise. That's going to
decreasingly depend on C, which you can see in
the denominator there. Now you can see if I just had one asset class
and I was running one predictive regression
and I was worried that my gamma I proxy was
correlated with Gamma H, I wouldn't be able to really
separate this at all. But using relative
predictability can help me separate these two things. That's what we're going to use. The fact that the first
effect is increasing in C_ i and the second
effect is decreasing in C_ i is going to be what's key for our empirical results. This is basically what's
going on in the model. You have a change in
intermediary risk aversion here. For these assets with
the high cost where it's hard for households
to invest indirectly, there's going to be
almost no substitutions through quantities and the price is going to fall substantially for asset class 1. Where it's easy for the
household to invest, intermediary risk
aversion increases, the household can
easily substitute and prices won't
change very much. That's exactly what
we're using in the data. Having said that, I need to make choices about what
returns I'm going to use. How am I going to
get variation across asset classes and the
ease of investment? Then also which
proxies I'm going to use for intermediary distress? I'm going to use these two
proxies in the literature. Some based on my own work using changes in
broker-dealer leverage, another one based
on He Kelly Manela. For what I'm going
to show you here, we're just going to use
an average across both of those factors as a joint measure of the health of these
financial intermediaries. Then we don't need household risk aversion for
our main results, but I'll show you
results where we include household risk aversion
proxies as well. Those have the implication
that they should have the exact opposite
pattern in the data. I'll show you looking at the habits measure from Kimball
Cochrane looking at CAY. We have other ones as well. We're happy to include
additional things here. What returns am I going to use? I'm going to look at stocks, treasury bonds, sovereign
bonds, options, commodities, FX, CDS, then we've just actually added a
couple more series. A high minus low yield
corporate bond return, and then a mortgage-back
security return as well. We think of these as more complex intermediate
asset classes. Then I'll show you results
as well where we look at convertible bond
arbitrage returns and fixed income
arbitrage as well. Things that we think
are going to be unlikely for households
to invest in directly, we should have effects
showing up more there than for stocks. Normalizing these asset classes is going to be very important. We're going to look at two ways to do this normalization. One is normalizing
them by the mean. Dividing the return
in the asset class by the unconditional
risk premium and then dividing by the volatility. We basically just
want to account for. We could get an increasing
pattern of coefficients if one asset class is just a
levered version of another, and so forth, the volatility and the risk premium normalizations. We'll deal with that fact. The risk premium normalizing by the unconditional
expected return will deal with any unconditional
differences in Betas and things like this
across the asset classes. Just to say a note on how
we do these cost rankings, this is the ranking that
we're going to come up with. We tried to base this on as
many sources as we could. None of them are
fully comprehensive in terms of giving us
this C_ i ranking. But basically we went
to flow of funds, you can look at
household holdings of these different assets and you can compare
that to institutional holdings of these
different assets, specifically broker-dealers and other financial
institutions. You can see who's holding
relatively more of what. That gives us a partial ranking. Then we did these two other
partial rankings as well, looking at value at risk to get intermediary exposures to different asset
classes and looking at this data from the
BIS on derivatives of who's trading in
these asset classes. That gives us this ranking here. Let me show you the
main results were first-time normalizing
by the risk premium. I'll focus on two things, the pattern of coefficients
going from left to right, and also the R-squared is
going from left to right. You can see things becoming larger in terms of the size of the coefficients as
we're going from left to right and also statistically
more significant. Also the same pattern is going on for the
R-squared for stocks, it's around one percent. For some of these other
ones, it's much higher. I put this vertical divide here where we have
credit and MBS. Those are the two
things that we added, but they're not incorporated
in the ranking. You shouldn't think of
them as ranked eighth and ninth in terms of
intermediation, but the one through seven
ones were based off the ranking that
we had just done. Here's the main
result I showed you, that's just plotting
the coefficients from the previous graph. Here's several other metrics that you might be interested in. Here's the normalizing
by volatility in the second panel. Again, it's still gives this relatively
increasing pattern and same with the
R-squared at the bottom. Depending on which
normalization you do, you get slightly
different results, but still this upward
sloping pattern. Now, what would
happen if I replace this with a household
risk aversion measure? Here's doing it for cay, same
thing for habits though, you actually get a
downward sloping pattern. That's exactly what the model or idea would have predicted, that it would matter
more for things that are easier for
households to invest in, unless for the harder things. Now we're going to use that in a panel regression framework. We're going to have interactions for how intermediated
the asset classes are. That's what those dummies are
and that interaction term, we're going to include household
risk aversion as well. Let me show you those results. There are different ways
to do those dummies. Let me focus on the last one, which is just doing a
rank of the asset classes from left to right, from 1-7. What you can see is
this interaction term being positive insignificant, that's consistent with what
I showed you earlier of an increasing pattern of coefficients across
the asset classes. For Gamma H for this household
risk aversion proxy, you actually see a negative coefficient on the
interaction term consistent with the
downward sloping pattern. What we're going to do
is we're going to use this to try and decompose the variation in risk premia attributable to
each one of those. We're only going to be
using the interaction terms to do that decomposition. For example, the non
interaction term for Gamma I, we don't know whether or not to ascribe that to
intermediaries or households. We're only going to
use this difference. That's where I come up
with this graph here. These are lower
bounds just based on that interaction term. We're getting a significant
amount of risk premia, ascribe to intermediaries in the blue for the more
intermediate assets. The opposite thing for
households in the red. I don't have time to talk too
much about the robustness, but I'll just point you
to this in the paper. Let me just address one
issue of time-varying risks. So far we've all talked about time-varying
risk aversion. Maybe it's that these measures lineup with time variation
and risk in the right way. The concern here would be that the more intermediated
asset classes happened to become more risky exactly when intermediary
health is poor. That's the issue that we
would have to deal with. We do this in a few ways. I'll just show you one. We just see whether or not those measures predict
future variance. Whether or not the
pattern of loadings maps to the patterns of loadings
that I showed you before and we don't find that
here. We look at skewness. We look at all different
ways of measuring risks. Again, we can only
control or deal with observable
variation in risk. But we don't find
anything there. Then I'll say one thing quickly about additional evidence
from Hedge Fund returns. Again, this is an
area where we would think intermediary health
would particularly matter. It's probably hard
for households to invest in these directly. We see something like this so for things like
convertible bond arbitrage, fixed income arbitrage, we see a lot of predictability from these
intermediary measures. We see a lot less for the
overall stock market. Again, this is
different data that's consistent with the main idea. Let me conclude here. Do intermediaries matter
for aggregate asset prices? We argued the answer is
yes, households too, but they have these
distinct patterns across these different
asset classes. Intermediary risk appetite
should matter more for assets that
are more difficult to directly invest in. That's exactly what we find
empirically and the opposite being true for household
risk aversion. 