James Poterba: As
those of you who have been frequent participants in the NBER Social Security meeting over the last few
summers will know, we have tried to identify a core big issue on which
there would be some scope, not for paper presentations, as much as for presentations on what we know and what some of the core open issues are. We've talked about
mortality prediction, about fertility rates,
disability claiming rates. This year, there was just an obvious topic to
convene this discussion around, which is the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic
for social security and disability. We have four panelists
this afternoon who will be able to
attack this question from different perspectives. James Stock, the Harold
Hitchings Burbank Professor of Economics at Harvard and a former member of the Council
of Economic Advisors. We'll start off by talking about the current state of
the economic impact of the pandemic and
what we know about the possible near-term
consequences. We'll then turn to the team from the Social Security
Administration, chief actuary Stephen Goss, as well as deputy chief
actuary, Karen Glenn, who will basically talk with
us about the work that's going on at Social Security and their take on a
variety of things, the drivers of mortality, near-term returns, and other factors that
contribute to the outlook. Finally, Louise Sheiner, who's the Robert Kerr
Senior Fellow in Economic Studies
at Brookings and the policy director at
the Hutchins Center and a member of recent technical
panels at Social Security, will give her impressions of some of the
long-term consequences we should all be focused on. James Stock: There's been
a lot of research on economic activity and cut shutdown orders
and so forth and I just want to summarize
what that literature says because I think we're at a point of consensus about that. I want to do a quick review of the public health data as of this morning and I know Steve and Karen are going
to say more on that. I want to talk a
little bit about the policy dependence of the pre-vaccine recovery and then I want to spend
some time looking at the post-vaccine recovery. For your topic like Social
Security and economics, one would normally
be thinking about a very distant horizon. I think for reasons that
I'll make clear what matters over the
next six months is of tremendous
importance in my view, for the more distant horizon. Here we go. There's been quite a bit of work
and I've listed some papers here and
this is a partial list. There's been quite
a bit of work now on what actually
the dynamics on a daily or a weekly
basis were during the shutdown and then during some of the reopening periods. The big question is, how
much of that shutdown is endogenous and how much
of it is exogenous? That is to say, if
the governor says all businesses are closed, is that what's
driving a shutdown on economic activity
or alternatively is it that just people
don't want to go to the restaurants if they think you're going to be infected? By and large where
this literature comes down is on the second
one of these points, which is that not all of it, but much of the shutdown's
self-protective behavior. There's a huge implication
of that and the reopening, you can't just open a
restaurant and say, great, people will go back. People don't only go back when they feel comfortable doing that and I'll show a couple
of pictures to that end. There's a really
important implication, which is that you can't simply announce that the economy
is going to reopen, you can't simply say that bars are open
or whatever it is, the only way the economy is really going to recover
even in the short-run or get any semblance
of normalcy even in the short-run is by
suppression of the virus. Epidemiological policy
or public health policy at this point is
economic policy. Here's a couple of pictures. The one on the left is just something I pulled
down this morning from TSA looking at the people who go through screening
seven-day moving average. What's striking about
this is, of course, not just the big drop
being in March and April, which of course everyone knows, but the remarkably
slow recovery. Despite all of the economic
reopening announcements, despite all the governors or many of the governors
lifting restrictions, we are still down at I
don't know, what is this? A quarter of where we
were or maybe even less a year ago in terms of people actually
going on the plane. If you look at it
recently as there's been this uptake in cases and deaths, it's flattened out over the course of the
summer travel season. The picture on the right here is a diffs in disc type study, which is this chart
happens to be taken from a paper by Chetty and Hendren
and Friedman and others. But there's a lot of other papers that
make the same point. This is looking at spending and this is comparing Colorado, which reopened earlier
than New Mexico. You can look at spending in Colorado and here's
the Colorado reopening and here's the New Mexico
reopening and you can see that basically, there's
very little difference between these two. What's driving the spending is not whether the businesses
are open or closed, but whether people want to go and shop or go
to the restaurant. That really brings us
to the question of what does the data
look like right now? I think everybody
is aware of this. We'll all be quick
and I know that Steve and Karen are going
to say a little bit more. In the Northeast,
which was hit early, deaths have been declining. There's been a little
uptick in cases. In the rest of the US, cases surged back in June. Deaths have been ticking
up consistently. If you look at the
different states, Arizona seems to have
cases declining now, although deaths which occurred with a lag
are increasing. Texas continues to
have cases increase. Florida might have peaked
in terms of cases, but it's not quite clear, but in any event, deaths are continuing to
increase in Florida. Some people call this a first wave or a second
wave or whatever. But we're still in
the midst of this. What this raises
here's just some data on the effective R and
as you can see here, a lot of some of these states are still hovering around one. Arizona is hovering around one, Florida is hovering around one, Massachusetts is
hovering around one. One is better than 1.2, but it's not where we need to be if what
we're really going to be doing is fully
suppressing the virus. I guess we get to do a
little self-promotion. I'm going to talk about
a paper which was a bureau working
paper back in May and then a new version of that
is our Brookings paper coming out that was in the
June's Brookings conference. The big picture conclusion from that paper is that the closures themselves or simply closing restaurants or simply
closing shopping malls doesn't have enough oomph by itself to really
stop a second wave. Here's a simulation
of a second wave, where people have
stopped wearing masks and that sort of thing. What really works
for a second wave is increased testing, increased mask
wearing, quarantine, self-isolation, small group, restricting large group
gatherings outside of the workplace and outside
of shopping and it's possible to do that based
on our simulations. But that is entirely
a matter of policy. I think the main point here is whether we
end the year with 10 plus percent unemployment or whether we end the
year with the low, with the mid-single-digit
unemployment, is entirely a matter
of what happens with epidemiological policy
over the next few months. Especially what happens with expansion or not of testing and tracing and
protection for the [inaudible]. What do we make of this
in terms of forecasts? Here's a couple of forecasts. I'm going to just look
at the GDP forecast, the index to level of GDP as produced by the Wall Street Journal survey of professional forecasters, which is nice because it's publicly available every month. On about the 10th or
11th of the month. Back in May, the Wall
Street Journal forecasters were moderately pessimistic. They saw a V coming out
of the second quarter. But then after into next year, it really looked like
the median forecast or we're saying that we'd be essentially on the path of GDP during the financial crisis. I've set this figure
up so that this is the GDP path projected by
CBO before the pandemic. This is the actual path of GDP during the
financial crisis and then this is the Wall
Street Journal forecast. Based on the May and
June employment reports, those forecasters
got more optimistic. The median one
thought that we might almost be back to the
pre-pandemic level of GDP by the beginning of 2021 or maybe if you
project this out, maybe the middle of 2021. I personally think that
this is overly optimistic. It's also based on the
June employment report. This is July 11th. The forecasts were actually done earlier than that and
my guess is they don't take into account the full
range or if the implications of the second round of shutdowns and
consumption drawbacks. But anyway, that's
just what it is and I think Steve and Karen will be
discussing this further. I want to provide some
time series evidence. In the few minutes that remain, I'm going to provide some
time series evidence on what I think are
the two key features, two key questions here, which is the transition
from what I might call faster V-shaped dynamics to slow dynamics coming out
of normal recessions. When do we think
that might happen? Under what circumstances
might that happen? How do we think that
that's going to play out? How do we think about
the post-COVID recovery? Then there's a related
question which is this like a
completely new world? Is this recession
entirely different? If so, how would actually
be pretty optimistic? Because we might
think that all of the traditional dynamics that
we normally see are ones we don't need to pay
attention to and that this recession is just got a
new world of fast dynamics. We might come out of this quite quickly, or alternatively, have the old dynamics or the old co-movements
essentially continued to exist in the current crisis just exacerbated in a huge way. Unfortunately, the preliminary analysis that I'm to present
suggest it's the latter. Here's slow dynamics. This is what we don't
like and this is where the unemployment rate
increases between like almost one percentage
point decreases by about one percentage
point per year during the 1980s recovery, by about 0.5
percentage point per year during the next
two recoveries, and then during the
most recent recovery by about seven-tenths of a
percentage point per year. This slow and steady march of the unemployment rate
towards a lower rate. If we find ourselves at the
end of year or when we get a vaccine at about a 10 percentage point
unemployment rate. Just extrapolating this,
we'd be looking at a recovery like the
financial crisis recovery. The question is, where
are we going to be? When do we think these slow dynamics are going to take over? To try to get at the
fast and slow dynamics, we've done some time series
modeling of weekly series. This is the weekly economic
index which is produced by the New York Fed and
the Dallas Fed jointly. What we've been able
to do is extract a slow-moving factor or slow-moving component and
fast-moving component. The fast-moving
component accounts for nearly all of the most
recent movements. Although it is
interesting to note that recently the slow-moving
component, the more persistent, what we might think of as normal business
cycle component does seem to be declining in
that weekly economic index. Unfortunately, I hope that by this point we'd have enough information to be able to tease out the slow-moving into fast-moving dynamics
and maybe see some of the fast-moving leak over into the slow-moving and we haven't really been
able to do that. One thing I do like is
the forecast chart, which shows that there's
a pretty wide range of uncertainty in terms of even the weekly index
going into the fall. I actually think that's
unreasonable forecast band. Here's a second exercise and this exercise is looking
at monthly co-movements. This might be a
little hard to read. This is going to
be a growth rate of the index of
industrial production. What you can see, is that a five-factor model fit
to 80 something series , monthly in series. This has been around for ages, you fit it through 2019. Given the estimated
parameter value, you can compute what the five
factors would be and then compute what the
predicted values should have been using
the old parameter values. That's a measure of
out-of-sample stability of the old factor model
for the new dynamics. What's striking about this
figure is that you see that those old factors completely explain the movements in
industrial production. Maybe that's not surprising. If you have five factors, you ought to be able to get
five series exactly right. Maybe this is just one of them. This is the picture for retail sales and you can
see that really matches. Also, this is the figure
for payroll employment. You can see that again,
really nails it. The big macro aggregates are
co-moving in a way that is remarkably consistent with historical business
cycle patterns. Much bigger, much faster, but the same co-movements. That maybe is neither
here nor there because we know the shocks are different and maybe
they'll die away. Here's the scary part for me, which is we start looking at
duration of unemployment. You can see that duration
of unemployment, that is the number of people
unemployed for 5-14 weeks, had the same dynamics in this recession as in
previous recessions. It actually went down. The growth rate actually declined a little
bit, not as fast. Well, that's because of
people sleeping over from 14. The June employment report seeping over from 14
weeks into 15-26 weeks. If you look at the 15-26 weeks, you'll see that there's
that increase and it's the same co-movements with
these big aggregates. If you look at 27 weeks plus, it's the same co-movement. What concerns me is that we're seeing this same
pattern that we see in normal recessions of people slipping into longer-term
rates of unemployment. I guess that makes sense. But maybe what is novel
or maybe the contribution here is that these
patterns are the same as in previous recessions. What that really flags, is that if this continues,
that is to say, if the COVID public
health situation does not improve so that the current economic
situation does not improve, we would expect to see this continue slippage into
longer-term unemployment. Those are situations that are consistent with
the slow dynamics taking over during the
post-COVID recovery. I know Louise is going to
say a few things about looking further ahead and there's been an awful
lot of discussion. What are the implications
for productivity growth? What are the implications for
labor force participation? How are their major
sectoral shifts that we can anticipate
during all these? Remember that air
travel picture, are there shifts in the
structure of the workplace? We're going to
have implications. It reminds me of when I was
in grad school a long many years ago, I just heard this. It's always stuck with me that this great economist response. What's going to be happening to productivity growth
over the next 20 years? The answer is, well, it could go up and it could go down and it could stay the same. That I think continues
to be the right answer in response to the
COVID-19 recession. I think it's just
awfully early to even know what the
direction of any of these signs actually
are at the moment and the immediate issue for fiscal health and
social security. Of course for the
overall economy is just do everything we
can to try to be on this slightly more optimistic
path so that we're only four or five
percentage points of GDP gap as opposed to eight or nine
percentage points of GDP gap in a year from now. Stephen Goss: We're going
to talk to a little bit of the COVID effects on economy, demography, social security
benefits, and financing. But we want to start on
actually slide Number 3, with really some
of the background, some of the nature of the
characteristics of COVID-19. Because after all, that's
the first-order effect, or what is the nature
of this virus? We're all familiar how
it is communicable, it's transmissible prior
to symptom showing up, even with somebody who
never show symptoms. One of the unfortunate things, it's going to have a
specific implications near-term and long-term is the nature of immunity
that is acquired. It appears as the moment as though it's much
less than 12 months. Therefore, that has
direct implications for her immunity and also the potential for repeated
infections for folks, this is very much yet
to be determined. By the way, I should mention Karen and I, and
others in our office, have talked to Dave Rubin over a CHOC Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
and Mark Lipson in Harvard the Chan School about a number of these ideas
about the characteristics of the virus which has been
extremely informative. One of the observations
is that some of the European
experiences indicated that the overall death rate
might be not all that high, 0.4-1 percent concentrated
higher ages and one of the major questions
is compromised for survivors going
on later in life. The fundamental question
we're all facing here in the near term is, will there be a
vaccine or a therapy, and how effective will that be? If we flip to slide Number 4, our real focus here
is probably on deaths because deaths are why there are a
lagged indicator, they are a relatively pure
indicator of what's going on. We all know that
reported cases through testing are not only lagged, but they're also unclear. We've heard people saying that the number of
cases that are actually reported might be of a small fraction
of the number of cases that are actually
infected in society. Are we looking at something
that could be like a worst-case scenario in 1918? Or come the fall, we
had dramatic increase? Because people let
down their guard, or are we looking at
something that will be much better in 2020? Or we avert a substantial
second wave in the fall? If so, we may be able
to return large way to normal as I think James
Stock was indicating, or perhaps to next year. If not, then we are facing
something that will be much more serious than
one year or two years drop-off in economic activity. By the way, we pay attention to deaths because deaths
would appear to be the driver that
really is going to be directing individual
and societal response to what's going on. On the next slide, we can see where
we are currently. James Stock had slides on
where we are currently. This is a little bit
different look again, focused on the deaths and
one of the things we're all very familiar with is
the lag and reporting. We're most familiar with that. Think about that in terms
of the lag of reporting for people who have been infected, obviously not until
they get tested and it's confirmed where
we have counts, the number of people
who are infected. But we have a similar
situation with deaths. I would suggest you
go back actually in early April Gill Shenski and. Hyrum Beltran Sanchez
over at and UCLA and I started looking at some
of the numbers from CDC and some of their stuff. We realized very quickly
that if we just looked on the week-by-week
death reports that these were lagged and
they were incomplete. The left little graph here you can see are an
indication of that. This is focusing
on week number 15, the week ending April 10, which was the peak level of deaths that have
been reported. By the way, the CDC numbers that we've been looking at this as under the flu view of panel that CDC has
been reporting on Fridays for many weeks. Actually, it's
gotten delayed after June 26th to being about
a week late coming up, but we're hoping it's
still consistent data. The data are actually shown for the number of
deaths that occurred within a week and not
reported in a week. What we recognized fairly
quickly was the number of deaths that were
reported within a week, say for week number 15, which is ending April 10, the number that were
reported as of April 24 were likely to lower than what
actually being occur. We started doing some lag
analysis by looking at a two-week separation counts that were indicated by
CDC for a given week. By using that lag analysis, we were able to
make a projection in May 1 that the
total deaths for that week 15 ending April 10 would actually not be the number that was shown as of that time, about 65,000 more like 80,000. It turned out this
looks like this is a pretty robust
approach of looking at this lag analysis because
home behold as time has gone by for that week 15 of 2020, April 10, the number actually looks like it's
creeping up towards essentially what we've
been estimating on our lag analysis
of about 80,000. We've done successive
lack analysis. I have at least what looks like the lag analysis is
continuing to show an expectation for
that week about 80,000 deaths and we're
climbing up to that. Now on the right-hand panel, you can see a little
bit of what the implications of this are. What we've shown here on the
blue and the black lines are what CDC was showing
for the various weeks, January all the way out through partially into
June of this year in their reports as of
June 26th and July 11. You can see the June
26th or what they were showing for the
number of deaths in these weeks that they
had recorded today and the blue line and then for July 11, you can
see what they are. But when we apply
our lag analysis and make an estimate of what completed deaths
are likely to be, and again, in the
left panel you see how effective that
appears to be. It looks as though the
turnaround in deaths going back up didn't actually
occur in July. Yes, it did occur in July in terms of the
numbers of reports, but it looks like likely the complete count of actual deaths looks
like it actually turned around in June and started going up essentially in the
weekend in June 12th. Again, the lag is significant
here and it's something we want to pay attention to because we
really want to know where the turning points
and more changes are really occurring. If we are on that, let me end with this
preliminary stuff and pass the baton over to Karen to talk about some of the economic effects
near term and long term. Karen Glenn: Great.
Thank you Steve. Before I really get started, I just want to note that I'm in a vacation rental right now and the road noise is a little louder than
I would have liked. Hopefully, it isn't too
distracting everyone but just be aware. First, we just
wanted to go through a few economic effects
on social security. The main takeaway here
is shown on this slide, is that in the near term, legally be largely due to the lower payroll tax it'll be, which in turn is due to
the reduced employment. This is a really
nice graphs one of those our team put together. It looks a lot like what
Jim's options earlier. A lot of lines here so let
me orient you a little bit. These are real GDP level
in dollars billion, the solid line are what folks were
projecting before COVID. You will see on
here the red line which suppases our 21 budget, which is always a little more optimistic than the
other forecasters. The blue line,
which is similar to the purple line is
what was projected in the 2020 Trustees' reports and now before any
COVID effects. Now, the lower dashed line, what forecasters are saying now? There was obviously a huge
drop in quarter two of 2020 and then rising up at
various rates going forward. What we've done here, some Moody's, IHS, and CDO. The takeaway here,
forecasts are really very unlikely and they're being
updated extremely frequently. Sometimes you'll see
new forecast each week. Now, similarly, this
is just looking at the ratios of where we
were pre-COVID to now. Again, we've got CBO, we've got Moody's
and we've got IHS. A huge drop to 2020, rising up relatively
quickly from most of them. You'll see that the
IHS projection in May actually went above
pre-COVID levels, but they've come
down a bit instant. The bottom line here, will the GDP levels
return to those pre-recession levels, or will a permanent loss to future potential GDP as been
typical in past recession? Labor force. This really mattered to the Social
Security program. Labor force goes directly
into employment, which was then directly into the payroll
taxes we received. Again you can see really very end projections of
what's going on here. IHS in June was saying labor force participation rates would be all the way down to 59 percent and rising
back up from there. CBO had a really
more gradual path and Moody's is just somewhere. How severe would be if there
aren't any fee and will we get back to where we expect it to be before the reception? Really what goes directly into Social Security financing? It's really the earnings and
the payroll tax revenue. A similar graph here before COVID things were
looking pretty wavy, lines were going up and up. After you see the drop, and then again, those
revenues go up over time. The trends all seem to reach pre-recession levels within
the next few quarters. But it looks like
we're really going to take a hit on the level. The forecast is all the lower
nominal aggregate earnings is that because of
lower employment, lower inflation,
lower real wage, really a combination
of all three of those factors go into that. Social Security
payroll tax revenue will almost certainly be
lower than we've projected, but by how much? That being April, we offered
a few scenarios that it's been 15 percent lower earnings in payroll tax for year 2020. Now, looking like them, I've been a little excessive. Nearly 10 percent
seems more likely. Of course, who knows what's
going on now or then? Will there be a
substantial second wave that can make us a little
more pessimistic again? One good piece of news, part of it is legislation
recently with allowing employers to
differ payroll taxes. That does not affect
social security at all. We get the revenues just
like we always would have. No changes there. You may have heard in the
news that the president is really interested
in a payroll tax cut, will then happen or today. Historically, any of
those payroll tax cut has been reimbursed to a trust fund by the general
fund of the Treasury. It's likely that if
there is any group cut, social security would
be unaffected by them. The big question,
why would any of these effects be beyond 2020? Now, I think I will turn it back over to Steve to go through the demo required on
the demographic side. Stephen Goss: Thank you, Karen. Great. We've got some
demographic slides. Karen, I'm going to talk a
bit about the mortality, fertility, and immigration. Let's start with a mortality if we could flip the
Slide number 13. This is really just
where our baseline is in the latest
trustees report. I think we all understand that mortality is tended
to drop over time. But since 2009 not so much. Deaths of despair, lots of other things have
been happening. One of the important
things to keep in mind with mortality is
that a decline in mortality at very
younger ages under about 35 or 40
actually is positive for program finances. That's right.
Because more people surviving at those ages. A decline in mortality at higher ages is a negative
for program finances. Of course, those of us who
are over 50 like to see it. But for program finances
that has an effect. Each specific is
really important. Now getting into, well, what's happening under COVID, if we flip to the next slide, we see the big question is, how much effect will
COVID deaths have? We know they're going to be
concentrated at older ages. The question is, will there be persistent cumulative effects on mortality in the longer term? We know about the direct
virus-related immediate deaths. We're counting those. We're getting with
a lag and we're estimating for
completeness also. But increased deaths
from COVID at a later point because it's cumulative compromises that
people are experiencing. The other question is, are we also having
a misquoting of deaths or deaths from
despair and violence, suicide and homicide that are associated with the current
pandemic situation? Very serious questions and at this point the data
are simply unclear. We flip to the next slide. The next slide, we have some graphs here of
what's been going on. These are again, deaths
from the CDC FluView basis. I should mention there
that in that data series, provided weekly by CDC, they show total deaths in
the US then they also split up the pneumonia influenza COVID depict deaths separately. These graphs show you what
has been happening over the last several years on
a period-by-period basis. Over time, as we
move seasonality on the left we see a weekly desk excluding influenza,
pneumonia, and COVID. We can see the typical
what has happened is after the 11th week of each year, we tend to see that
it drops off a lot. We get past the flu season. Obviously this
year, not the same. Keep in mind, this is
deaths excluding pneumonia, influenza, and COVID. The right panel is
the implicit numbers that come out of the
FluView numbers from CDC, which show what is happening if we look solely at the numbers for influenza
pneumonia and COVID. The interesting thing on this is even with our
completeness analysis, these numbers for
the PIC do not show an increase as we get into June, whereas the numbers excluding
pneumonia, influenza, and COVID do show
the increase on the red line by our
completeness analysis in June. Is this a misquoting issue or are we really seeing
really a drop-off in deaths due to COVID continuing through June
and its other reasons? A question to be determined
because we don't really have clarity on what the death counts are with any precision by cause of death. Now, on the next slide, we see this elaborated
a little bit more. Here we're showing on
these different crafts, the black line is what we have uncompleted
estimated basis. Again, this is most of
the way through June because I'm a little bit
reluctant to show you numbers that would be taking you into July and the
completed basis. The completion analysis is
a little bit tricky there. This is just through
most of June, I believe it's June 19. We can see the total
deaths are rising up and the deaths
for other than PIC, which is the red line,
are also rising up. But the number is estimated
based on the numbers from CDC for PIC are not actually
going up in that time. There is a serious
question here as to whether there
is not just lag, but also that there
is a coding issue. Are the numbers that are really associated with
COVID really being put forth and being
recorded by CDC and reported to CDC at a basis that is really consistent? Others we know some folks. I think Dan, I forget his last name up at
yields looking at this, what can you add
total deaths may be a better indicator of
what's really going on here, especially from
our point of view, or total deaths is
what really matters. The fact that deaths
are coming from COVID versus from suicide
or anything else, all matters in terms
of the number of people we have in our population as workers or beneficiaries. With that, again,
what we now pass the baton back to
Karen for some of the other demographic issues. Karen Glenn: Thanks, Steve.
Obviously, mortality is a big factor when it
comes to COVID effects. But we do have some other
effects of COVID on other demographic factors
that are important to the Social Security program and one of those is fertility. This graph here is just
showing us historically what's the total fertility
rate [inaudible]? The total fertility rate is
a measure of the number of births per woman over
her full lifetime. You can see that it was
way up in the baby boom, came down precipitously
in the '60s and '70s remained at pretty low
levels for a while, rose up. Then now, since
the last recession has been declining quite a bit. Most recent data is about 1.7 I believe that was in 2019. Obviously, some of
that was due to the most recent recession. Some of it is likely
due to other factors. Are women delaying
birth more and more? COVID obviously has
induced a recession. Will it have similar effects on fertility as other
recessions have? Will we expect fertility
to go down even further, which changes the age
distribution of the population, which is really important to the Social Security program? It's really about the
number of workers per beneficiary that's
paying for the program. You can see here the three
tiny alternatives two line. These are intermediate
projection for the future. We are assuming that ultimately we'll get back up
to 1.95 per woman. Will COVID affect that
in the near term? We wouldn't really expect any longer-term
effects from COVID, but it is something
worth thinking about. Similarly immigration. We would expect COVID
to have some of that. Although they are extremely
speculative at this point. We've split things up into two different buckets basically. Number 1 is lawful immigration. We're thinking there may be some timing effects due to
delayed processing there. Obviously not as many folks are actually completing
their applications, getting them in, and
getting through the system. But our general thinking at this point is that
these folks who have been waiting for a long
time to immigrate to the US and they likely
won't be deterred. Unauthorized immigration
might be a different story. Sometimes people say, well, why do you guys care about
unauthorized immigration? You do receive
payroll tax revenue from a lot of these workers, whether they make up a
social security number or if some other way of
getting money into the system. Many of them already
are paying taxes. We do expect border closing
to help them with that. Really both people coming into the country and
leaving the country. Will the recessions deter
unauthorized immigration? Historically, in
other recessions, immigration has gone down. We would expect
COVID-induced recession to have some more effects there. An interesting thing when
thinking about some is, will the varying
impacts of COVID around the world affect
migration patterns? They as well might, again, it's pretty speculative
at this point, but it is something
we're thinking now. Moving on to some program-specific
effects on Social Security. We talked about economic
effects, demographic effects, which are a little broader, but zooming in more
on Social Security. One thing you may have heard about, it's been in the past. I think Andrew [inaudible] first had an article about
it a few months ago, is the effect of the
average wage index. The average wage index for
2020 will likely decline. Meaning that those who
become newly eligible for Social Security benefits in 2022 will have lower benefits. For retired worker benefit, this is anyone who
reaches age 62 in 2022, so those who were born in 1960. For disabled workers
is those who will be newly entitled for
benefits in 2022. Also survivors and
auxiliary beneficiaries on those accounts as well. The key here is that the AWI is determined based on the ratio of total wages paid in a year, that's numerator,
to the denominator of the total number of at
any time workers in a year. The wages, the numerator
we expect will be down significantly
due to the recession. But the number of anytime
workers in a year, we don't expect that
to change very much. Overall, we think that
ratio will decline significantly just
because of the timing and the abrupt drop of employment
earlier this year. One thing I noticed we
didn't really put in the slides and
probably should have was that the AWI
directly affects Social Security benefit
calculation earnings index to two years before
your eligibility year. The AWI in 2020 is the indexing for anyone who
we're countering in 2022. Really there's two main effects here and let me go
through these quickly. I know we don't have a
huge amount of time, but we can answer
questions at the end. The first main effect, we're calling this the notch. Given an illustrative scenario similar to what we
talked about before, total wages for 2020
of about 10 percent below the level that was projected in last year's
trustee's report. The number of workers going
down just a little bit, about one percent lower than we projected in the 2020
trustee's report. What does that mean? Under this scenario,
about 4 million, actually, more than 4
million retired worker and disabled worker
beneficiaries who are newly eligible in 2022, would receive a benefit that's 9.1 percent lower than
expected or less, as would all survivor and auxiliary beneficiaries
paid on their account. That's about another 1 million. Another way to look at it, not only is it 9.1 percent lower than they
might have expected, it's also 5.9 percent lower than similar folks who
retired a year earlier. They're actually receiving lower benefits despite the wage injects into the program than people who retired
one year earlier. A secondary effect for
calling this one the boost. Same illustrative
scenario, the AWI will increase 9.1 percent
less than expected. This one's a little trickier, but all workers with earnings in 2020 to become
eligible after 2022, when their earnings are indexed, 2020 earnings will be indexed 10 percent higher than they would have otherwise. That one year of earnings
will get a boost. Because that increases for only one year of
their earnings out of normally the 35 used in the average
indexed monthly earnings, the increase will be
relatively small. It'll be generally
less than 0.3 percent. Averaging, you think
about 0.15 percent. While the effects are
small for an individual, it affects a lot
of individuals if anyone becomes
eligible after 22. For example me, I would
get this one at best. What are lawmakers
doing about this? One thing to know is that these effects won't really
be seen until 2022. There may not be a huge
rush to get this addressed. But I think lawmakers who are thinking there's all this COVID legislation
out there now, why not get it addressed now while people are
thinking about it? There are a few out there
right now that will address this as 4180, the Protecting Benefits
for Retirees Act. That was introduced on July 2nd by Senator Tim Kaine
and Bill Cassidy. That does not let the AWI increase from
one year to the next. It addresses both the notch and the boost to both of
those [inaudible] areas. Another bill was
HR 7499 that was introduced on July 9 by
Representative John Larson. Again, it doesn't let the AWI decrease from
one year to the next. But in this case,
the legislation specifically only
addresses the notch the boost remains in place. There are also a
few other items in this legislation that will raise benefits for just
the one year, 2020. They're very similar
to what is in Representative
Larson's comprehensive Social Security 2100 Act. A little advertisement at
the bottom of this slide, we did provide an analysis
to Representative Larson. You can find that
on our website. Moving on, what
do we see will be the effects on the
numbers of beneficiaries? Focusing on the retirement side, the OASI program, there's been a lot
of speculation and in the press and
elsewhere that the recession will cause workers to apply for retirement benefits earlier than they would have otherwise. We have seen that from
[inaudible] recession. We've been looking at
the data very closely. Mike Stevens in our offices got his finger on
the pulse there. We're actually not seeing
that in the data yet. Speculation is folks
are relying on extended unemployment benefits
for now and maybe later, if the recession persists then they will apply for the
retirement benefits. We do know that some of those extended
unemployment benefits are expiring at the
end of this month. We think it comes a dollar
extra these folks are forgetting if that is
introduced by legislation. Increases in survivor benefits will likely be
pretty limited here. One interesting point is that earlier benefit startup for those who have
introduced benefits, actually tends to lower longer-term cost
by a little bit. What about on the DI side? Again, so far we
aren't really seeing any evidence of increased
DI application. That may happen in the future, but we're not seeing any. One thing we're just
showing here on this graph is what happened in
the last recession. You can see in 2007 and 2008, we were getting about 1.5 million disability worker
applications a year. That jumps up extremely
quickly in the last recession, up to 1.8 million in 2009, 1.9 million in 2010. It did come back down even a lot more precipitously
than we expected. You can see, each one of
these lines is what we projected in each successor
trustee's report. We didn't do a great job of predicting this
extreme downturn. An interesting graph
that we'd like to show. What will happen
in this recession? If it extends, we would
expect to be some jump. Putting it all together, there will clearly be
competing effect on the size of the beneficiary
population in the near term. There will be a decrease in beneficiaries due to
the increased death. There will be increases
in beneficiaries if we get additional retirement
and disability applications, assuming the recession persists and recovery isn't abrupt. For example, is there an additional 200,000-300,000
DI application, and about one-half of
those are allowed, which is about the average? Will that be on the
order of the number of additional
deaths within 2020? Will it even out? Or could there be even more
beneficiary deaths in 2021? Again, comes with uncertainty as everyone seems to be
saying, we keep saying, we hope we'll know more
in a couple of months, but it seems like the
further down the road we go, the more uncertainty there is. Stephen Goss: You can
see, bottom-line, what's going to happen to
the trust funds under this. You can see this is
our projection under the 2020 Trustees Report
of what will happen to the cost of the program and where we will reach to preserve
depletion out in 2035, at which point we wouldn't be
able to pay full benefits. That was under a not taking
into account COVID baseline. What are we looking at under
the potential for COVID? Well, first of all,
let's take a quick look on the next slide. I know that Jim Stock earlier mentioned about
the last recession. Many other folks, including those at the Bipartisan
Policy Center and others, have said, ''Hey, maybe
this recession is going to be just like the
Great Recession.'' Well, I think there's
some real differences and we ought to be
cognizant of that. This is not an
economic recession of the type that we've seen
most often in the past. You can see in the
Great Recession here, whereas with most recessions, the real driver
of the impacts on Social Security is
the drop in revenue far more so than any effect on beneficiaries and
benefit amounts. You can see though, than the last recession which started at
the end of 2007, we had only a very
gradual movement towards less revenue
than had been expected. This is comparing what
actually occurred relative to our 2008
trustees report, which anticipated none
of that recession. You can see it took two, three, four years for the revenue
to really drop off those unemployment rates and the depth of the
recession was gradual. This recession is so
dramatically different, it happened in a heartbeat. There is that possibility
that if we get that wonderful vaccine
that we're all hoping for, that maybe we can come back, maybe not as precipitously, but perhaps almost
as precipitously. You can see also that the
persistent effects all the way through 2014 in
terms of the reduction relative to expectation in constant dollar revenue was quite dramatic under
the last recession. Well, we have that out of this. Bottom line, on our next slide, we are back in April. After our trustee's
report came out talking to the folks in
Bipartisan Policy Center, we speculated that time-based
on what we've seen today, that we might have for the
year as a whole, 2020, something like 15
percent less earnings, and less taxable earnings, and less revenue coming
into the program. If that would have
persisted for one year, we were estimating
that that would change our trust or combined trust on reserve depletion date and
truly in 2035 to mid-2034. That's assuming that
in 2021 we would basically, come back
with full recovery. If in fact, we had two years or a little bit more than two years of a 15 percent reduction in revenue relative to 2020 Trustees Report Expectation
and then came back in 2022, we were expecting
that we might move to early 2034 or maybe late in 2033 for the
reserve depletion. Now, more recently, as of a
hearing we had last week, and Jim Stock made
this point that the economic recovery
to date was looking like it was better than had
been expected back in April. What then we were assuming
the possibility of maybe only a 10 percent drop relative to expectations in aggregate wages and
earnings during the year, and if it were no
worse than that, then we might end up with our reserve depletion
data advancing, again, maybe only a half
a year into mid-2034. However, the huge question is, what is going to
happen beyond that? If we flip to the next slide, which is actually
our last slide. But I had to tell you this. If instead of closure from the pandemic extends
through 2021, and in fact, which would
be contingent upon having a second
wave in the fall, if we have or if we have a permanent reduction in the
level of economic activity, which Jim was referring to, and Karen was
referring to earlier, then we could have much more substantial
negative effects. The Great Recession
obviously advance our reserve depletion
date by about six years. Such could happen again if
we take a hit in terms of economic activity from which we do not recover anytime soon. Reserve depletion date,
it's up in the air. I much appreciate Jim
Stock's earlier panel which showed the breadth of a stochastic expectation
for the future. The screen is not tall enough
to really show that here, because we've never
seen such uncertainty. With that, let me stop here because we want to get Louise. Louise Sheiner: Going
to the panel that I was on with Jim who's been following every
daily movement in the data, and Karen and Steve who know exactly how this all
works for Social Security, I thought I go a little
bit big picture. Let's see how do I.
What I'm going to talk about today is what drives economic
assumptions usually, and how should
COVID change that? As Jim said, he said, I was a member of the last technical panel and so I'm coming at it from
that perspective. Everything I say today
should not be intended as any criticism as Steve or Karen. I learned so much from them and they are so
thoughtful about this. I just want to give
my view though. How does COVID affect my views on some of the assumptions? I'm just going to talk
about a few of them. Then I'm going to
move it away from just the Social Security
projections to think about what the implications of COVID might be for Social
Security policy, which is not Karen and
Steve's bailiwick, but it's thought I
would include it. The first thing I
want to talk about is how the predictions
are framed. They're basically
done with two sets. You have a near-term set. This is the first 10
years on a long-term set, that's the last 65 years. When we talk about
these projections to say there's 75-year projections, and so you should really reuse long-run historical averages as a guide to the
long-run assumptions. What that means in
general is that the first few years are going
to reflect current data. But then you're going
to have to transition to the long-run values. The most of the first 10
years really are a function of the gap between current
values and long-run values. That to my mind means that the long-run assumptions
drive the projections. Then I want to ask is the long run really important? A lot of people will
say, and I agree that the long run isn't that important because we don't
know anything about it, but I don't even want to
talk about that right now. I think that when you think
about why we care about these numbers from a policy
and political perspective, the really important numbers are for the next 10 and 15 years. At the demographic
transition where 1/3 of the way through is over at 2035, the HI trust fund depleting
within six years; OASDI by 2035 pre-COVID. Getting the next
10-15 years right is really what the projection
should be all about. Well, how does this
relate to COVID? Well, I think COVID can easily
affect the next 10 years, but it's not very likely to
have large long-run effects. If we're going to continue doing projections where
we're gearing towards a long-run value and we don't change the long-run
value very much, we might miss the COVID effects. I'm not saying they will, I'm
sure they're thinking very carefully about it but I just think there's
something to remember. Let me give you an
example of what I mean. One of the things
that SSH predicts it's the labor share. This is the compensation
shares and share of GDP. We know it declined
through the early '80s and it was not every year, but generally well below the
1947-2018 average since. There are various
explanations for the decline. I think we can over-explain the decline in labor
share with globalization, higher depreciation,
higher housing share, decline in worker power. These explanations I'm not sure which ones are exactly right
and how they work together, but they're all likely to
persist at least for a while. If you ask me what
my best guess of the labor share over the
next 10-15 years is, it would look like the
labor share today. It says over the long-run we're going to get back
to the long-run average, and so you can see they have these sharp increases
over the next 10 years, so they're back to the long run average by the end of it. I think that's a problem. Then when I think about COVID on top of it, I agree with Jim. It's too early to know how anything is going to work out, but right now when I look at the level of the stock
market and the level of unemployment it sure looks like that the labor share is going
to stay low for longer. Let's look at
productivity growth. There we've had very
weak productivity growth over the past decade. The trustees assume
it rises back to the long-run average almost
over the next five years. I thought that seemed
optimistic before. It could happen, but there's not much weight on the secular stagnation
hypothesis or something structural like
productivity related to aging, lack of competition. Then when we think
about what effect COVID will have on productivity, I argue in the long-run
probably nothing. Maybe there will
be some reduction from we recognize
now that we can have pandemics and so we need to have a little bit more preparation
which might be costly. But I think over the
next 10-15 years, again, speculative, I agree, the effects could
be substantial. If we have a lot of
business closures, then large cost to
start up again we have job losses if they are permanent which some of them
well clearly are, it means we're going to have
to find new labor matches. The quality of labor matches
are likely to suffer, human capital is
going to be lost. Then another question is
this prolonged period of lockdowns and working from home and uncertainty
about the future. What is in itself
doing to innovation? If we start to believe
people are all working together
in the same office is really important
for innovation. You just wonder
whether or not we're losing some undefined year, year-and-a-half where innovation is going
to be held down. Again, when I think
about what's going to happen to productivity, I would really want to focus on the next 10-15 years and not care so much about getting
back to a long-run average. Finally, let me talk
about interest rates that nobody has mentioned. Real interest rates have
been declining for decades. They average just a
half a percentage point from 2010-2019. Aging, rising inequality, low-productivity are
likely contributors. Again, things that many
people think are going to persist and the interest rates will probably remain
low for long. The trustees actually did lower their interest
rate recently to 2.3 percent which I think is a reasonable
long-run assumption, but again they get there very rapidly and so interest
rates are going up quite rapidly over the next
10 years or five years even then I think
that seems unlikely. Then one of the biggest
things that's happened since COVID is that
interest rates have fallen even more sharply. I show here what the July
2020 interest rate on the Social Security
Special Treasury is. It's dropped 1.25 percentage
points since January. That's the nominal rate, I think the real has probably
dropped a little bit less. This possibility of
low-interest rates for a really long time seems even more likely
than it did before. Importantly, the probability that the
interest rate is less than the growth rate of the
economy r less than g is what's high before
I think and higher now. If you think that this might
be a low long-run session, there might be a
lot more saving. You just have to worry
about this persisting. What are the implications now of COVID for Social
Security policy? I'll come back to
the r less than g. Action to address imbalances in Social Security and increases
in the federal deficit. We all know the
long-run projections. We will need to do those
eventually most likely. I think COVID has probably
sped up the date of reserve depletion
and likely increase the changes required to address the long-run imbalances
particularly because of the lower
interest rate. That doesn't necessarily mean
that we should ask sooner rather than later because of COVID and I have two reasons. One, thinking about ensuring the economic recovery
is complete, and two I'm going to go
back to the r less than g. Ensuring the full
economic recovery. Under the current law without any additional stimulus dollars which we're likely to get, but also no second wave and also pretty optimistic numbers about the control of the virus. CBO projects GDP
won't be back to pre-COVID baseline
for almost a decade. In my view, the main goal of fiscal
policy should be to get back to the hot labor market that we had right
before the pandemic. Labor markets are
incredibly helpful for low-income
working-age households. They lead to both higher GDP and lower inequality and I
think one of the things that we learned with the
hot labor market was potential GDP wasn't
bigger than we thought, but I worry with debt to GDP projected in the CBO
baseline again without additional stimulus to
hit 180 percent by 2021. With reserve depletion looming for Medicare and
Social Security, I think there will be
tremendous political pressure to cut spending and raise taxes. I think anything
that is aimed at debt reduction or are
putting Social Security back on a footing over the long
run before we are back to that strong economy is self-defeating for long-run economic and
social security health. From that perspective
the COVID economy in my view should lead actually
on Social Security to be later rather than sooner unless the action is just about either transparent
general revenues or announcement of plans far in the future that's not going to affect anybody's
spending behavior. Now let's talk about the
implications of r less than g. Another reason is often mentioned for acting sooner
rather than later is because delay imposes costs
on future generations, and that's the way we've
always talked about it. From the 2020 trustees report, substantial actions would
refer for several years. The change is
necessary to maintain Social Security solvency would be concentrated around fewer
years on few generations. Significantly larger
changes would be necessary if action is deferred until the
combined trust on reserves become
depleted in 2035. The truth is if r is less
than g over the long-run, everyone is actually
better off if we allow those reserves to exhaust and just run the
pay-as-you-go scheme. I'm going to just going
to show that with a very simple simulation using two interest rates which
I call high and low, and I can compare as now and required reserves at the end of simulation to cover
costs for one year; that's basically the long-run Social Security
stability condition, or deplete the reserves and then just run a
pay-as-you-go scheme. I'm going to use SSH, GDP, income and costs and the
average nominal GDP growth is about four percent over
the long run for SSH. My high nominal interest rate is 4.7 percent, which is the SSA long run. My low nominal interest is
one percent, which as I said, is a little bit higher
than what we're seeing now, it's a very low one. This is just
illustrative but I'm not saying this is
what's going to happen, but I just think that
we need to consider the implications if it does happen. Here's the experiments. If you look at the
top-right corner, I'm just going to explain
what the experiment is. This is the ratio of
trust fund to the cost. What I call one year is this
situation where we raise contributions just enough so that by the end of 75 years, we have one year's worth of
costs in the trust fund. The Paygo says, do
what you're doing now, don't do anything different
until it depletes. When the reserves deplete go Paygo. You have no trust fund. If you look on the left, at the top left, this is what happens with
high-interest rates. This is the contribution change that you have to
make relative to current law for these different
stabilization exercises as a share of GDP, not payroll. What I call the one-year, you see that you have to
raise contributions by a little bit more than
one percent of payroll at a different horizon. For Paygo, you do nothing
until reserves deplete. Then you have to do more
in order to be stable, you have to go to a Paygo which stabilizes at 1.5 percent
of GDP in the labyrinth. This is a classic trade-off. Earlier generations pay less, later generations pay more. Now let's look at
what happens if you have r less than
g and I do less, less because this r is
way less than g here. But here you can see it's
turning south on its head. You have to do about 1.5
percent of GDP starting now if you try to do this
long-run stability with one year of assets at the end. But if you go Paygo,
you do nothing now and then you
have to do less, and eventually, you
end up having to do just a little bit
less. Why is that? Well, we're in a world where
debt is less than three, which means assets are costly. The rate of return on
your assets are not enough to keep those assets
equal to one year of costs and so you
have to take some of your contributions just
to maintain those assets. I'm not saying with r less than g we should just
keep borrowing forever, we shouldn't pay any taxes. Obviously r less
than g forever is not something that
we can count on or that we can even understand how to think long term about. But I do think the
fact that it's pretty likely that r will be less
than g for a long time, especially with current
expectations on interest rates. I think that at least makes
you say the problem is not as urgent as
you might think and the benefits of
acting sooner are not what you might have once thought and I
just think it needs to get into this conversation. James Stock: It has
been the case in every recession we've
had for the last, whatever 50, 60 years that essentially there's been
unit root behavior. There's essentially been
a step-down in the level of GDP and the path has
been permanently lower. It could be that this
time is different. Of course, this time
could be different and there are a
lot of things that are really different
about it now. But I think betting against
the historical correlations, especially if we stay in this current model for another eight months
is not something I would want to do. Stephen Goss: That would
suggest, therefore that we should probably have a lower trajectory for expected GDP and
productivity growth in general on the future, given that we have not outlawed
the business cycle yet. If we're going to have repeated economic recessions from time to time, that would suggest, and if each one of
them is going to lop off something from
our potential, then we should have a
much lower gradient on potential growth
in the future. That's certainly
something to consider. To Louise's point, I would just want to mention
first of all that, Louise, you did point
out a number of assumptions which you
obviously disagree with. All of which I believe are
ones where you're saying the trustee's assumptions
are too optimistic. You didn't point out the disability incidence
rates which are assumed to rise back
up very quickly. Or mortality improvement, which is assumed to
rise back up very quickly also and go in the other direction
just by way of balance. The other thing I would just comment on that by
the way, Louise, also is please keep in mind
that the trustees report by law is supposed to speak to the actual status
of the trust funds. It's not supposed to be an economic forecast
or near-term, they're supposed to speak
to the actual status of the programs where
policymakers have tended to want to know what it's going to look like
over the long term. A final comment to also, and here's a hyper
speculation, innovation. I think we've all heard, all of us, I believe are
dealing from our homes. Some of us have a
beautiful background of a wooded setting and others have a bookcase
like Jim has. We have two Jims at
polar opposites on this. But I think there's been a lot of discussion about
many businesses now are getting used to the idea that people working
at home and having less infrastructure space is potentially a model in
some cases for the future. Will that be greater
efficiency or less efficiency? I don't know about you all,
but I think in my office, people have been
naturally working more hours than before, no commuting time,
the bars are closed, at least here in Maryland. Is innovation really
going to take a hit or is it possible that it
could go the other way? I'm not saying we're
banking on that, I'm just saying that while economics is indeed
the dismal science, not everything always need
necessarily be dismal. James Poterba: I can't resist jumping in for a second, Steve. We actually did a
panel last week on innovation and COVID at the Summer Institute
and had people who were from places like
the Janelia Farms, Howard Hughes Medical Institute
research lab, and NIH. I think the general sense
and it's also, I think, borne out by the experience
of Summer Institute in the last two-and-a-half weeks
is that the thing that is taking the greatest hit in this crisis for
scientific interaction is the informal and spontaneous
discussion of new ideas, new projects that people are doing pretty well
at managing to keep their current projects going and moving them
on to completion. But the startup process for new things is the more open-ended question
on how we're doing. The Q&A box, we have Olivia Mitchell asking
you a question about, in the UK the estimates indicate apparently a
five percent saving on social security
payouts as a result of COVID and do we have any
related numbers for the US? I think that probably is for Karen or for Steve
to say something. Karen Glenn: Go ahead,
please. I was just going to say I think we feel like it's
really too soon to tell. We're learning more. I don't think we
could say anything like a five percent
saving at this point. James Poterba: Olivia,
I think you should be unmuted if you want to jump in. Olivia Mitchell: Okay.
Thank you. It's obviously speculative and the
other question is, how to the extent that higher mortality is concentrated among the older population, how many years of less life will it take before it can make a five percent difference? Stephen Goss: Well,
so Olivia, if on average people in retirement
are living about 20 years, that would be simply
whopping one year off of their lifespan, after
they reach retirement, that'd be about a five percent. However, we have lots of
things going on here. It could be more or less than that as we move through time. Right now, we're
seeing obviously some increase in mortality, but we're not expecting to see five percent death amongst
our beneficiary population. Five percent death amongst our 60 million population would be a lot and we're not expecting necessarily to see that. On the other hand, in terms of the cost of social security, there's speculation that
we may have more people being compromised
in the near term, suffering insults and
therefore perhaps coming to us for disability as occurred in a big way in the
last recession. We are not seeing that as yet. Again, as Karen
mentioned before, probably largely because of the extended unemployment
and carriers payments. If those come to an end before we have a strong
recovery in the economy, we might see some surge in disability like
we did last time. But if that's the case, we would probably expect
that not to be persistent as what occurred in the last economic recession
was not persistent. Five percent reduction
in overall costs, that sounds like a lot and I'm sure that Louise would add-in. We'll probably see even
a greater reduction in that in terms of revenue. 