James M. Poterba:
Fertility is one of these demographic things that usually moves at
this glacial pace. But anyone who's been
following recent developments, fertility has actually
been trending down in the last few years, and even this year's
numbers that were discussed on the pages of
The New York Times recently. There are some really
interesting developments here. The questions of course are, how do we think
about what's going to happen going forward? Most of us know
that fertility is an incredibly
important driver of long-run financial health for Social Security and
other related programs. This is a topic which is really central as we think
about these issues, and I am absolutely
thrilled that we have a wonderful panel of
presentations this morning. Karen Glenn from Social
Security is going to start off by setting
the stage and laying out some of the basic fertility
trends and how this interacts with SSAs
thinking at the moment. Then we're going to
have Martha Bailey, who's in the midst of
writing a book about long-term trends
in US fertility. She's actually going to
have twice as much time as the other
panelists because she has an entire book length of things to try to fit
into her 30 minutes. She's going to then
talk about some of the longer historical
developments and put the current developments
into context. Then we're going to
turn to Kasey Buckles, who's going to tell
us about some of the work that she's
been doing on recent fertility
developments and understanding some of the
economic determinants. Followed by Caitlin Myers who is going to actually
talk about the role of changes in abortion policy and how that might have
some implications for thinking about what
the fertility numbers look like going forward. At that point,
technology willing, we're going to have
Steve Goss from the Social Security
Administration who was on the phone listening, jump in and make a
few presentations. We have some slides
and he's going to try and talk about
how some of the work that we've just heard intersects with work
that's being done by the technical panel and being projected at the
SSA at the moment. 