Anna Pavlova: In this paper, we argue that asset managers implicitly create subsidies
for certain firms. I don't think I need to show
this plot to this audience, but this just shows
assets under management. Currently we are sitting
at around 85 trillion, so you see the
numbers changed from billions to trillions and
this industry is growing. Most of these assets are
managed against benchmarks. For example, over 10 trillion is managed
against S&P 500 alone. I list other popular
benchmarks on this slide, and as you can see, all numbers are in trillions. Existing research
to date has focused primarily on asset pricing
implications of benchmarking, and to our knowledge, there isn't any work on corporate implications
of benchmarking, which is what this
paper is about. In the asset
management industry, performance is evaluated
relative to benchmarks. If you ask a manager whether such performance evaluation affects her portfolio choice, the answer would
be, yes, of course. If I do not have a
view on the stock, I will buy it with the exact same weight
as in my benchmark. If I have a negative view, I'll underweight it, but not by too much, because if I'm wrong, I risk underperforming
my benchmark. We argue that
performance evaluation, the way it's done
in the industry, create very strong
incentives for a manager to invest a fraction of the fund into the
benchmark portfolio, or the word closet indexing, used by Rob earlier. The manager would hold this benchmark
portfolio regardless of the risk and return
characteristics of the constituents as
I'm going to show. This crisis mechanical
demand from asset managers for
stocks in the benchmark, and this is the key to the implicit subsidy from asset managers for the
firms in the benchmark. In particular, the
value of a project will be different for a firm inside the benchmark
and the firm outside, and it will be higher for the
firm inside the benchmark. We'll call the difference the benchmark
inclusions subsidy. Thankfully we do not have
margin for the discussion, would complain about subsidy, but this really does
smell that way. Now on the last point, when we teach corporate finance, we always tell our students that the value of the project should be independent of the entity undertaking
this project. I guess the most
extreme example that we give to students
is to explain that a public utility does not have a comparative advantage in
funding fintech startups. Yes, it might have a
lower cost of capital, but it shouldn't apply
that cost of capital to a completely unrelated
project with different risk. This paper creates an
exception to this rule. We analyze a host of other corporate
decisions and show that firms inside and outside
the benchmark will have different decision rules for
mergers and acquisitions, for spinoffs, for IPOs, and other corporate actions. We fully characterize what we call this benchmark inclusion subsidy and show how it varies with firm
characteristics, for which firms it
will be higher, for which firms
it will be lower. In the interest of time, let me go straight to the model. This is a baby version of the
model, simplified version. Two periods, 0, 1. We've got three risky assets, Assets 1, 2, and y, with uncorrelated cash
flows distributed normally with mean Mu and
variance Sigma squared. The thought experiment
would be to place Asset 1 in the
benchmark and leave Asset 2 outside the
benchmark and will be merging with these
assets with Asset y. All stock prices are denoted
by S_i in this model, all stocks are in
supply of one share, and we also have
a riskless asset whose interest rate
we normalized to 0. There are two types of
investors in the model, there is a fraction Lambda C
of conventional investors, and the fraction of Lambda
AM of asset managers. All investors have CARA utility. Gamma here is the
absolute risk aversion. Now, it is the last talk
and it's a theory paper, so just to give you
used our notation, let's go over one
slide that we all know everything that's on it. This is the baseline economy
with no asset managers. The conventional
investors will all demand a standard mean-variance portfolio in this economy, and asset prices will be given
by the standard formula; the price of an
asset increases in its expected cash flows
and decreases in its risk. Now let's do a thought
experiment of combining from i with the Asset y, to form a single entity. X prime is the demand
for the combined asset, depends on the combined expected cash flows and the
combined variance. In this economy, a
standard result that we teach trivially holds that the value of the
combined asset equals to the sum of the value of
the two standalones. There is no cash flow synergy, we shouldn't expect this
to be any different. Now let's add asset managers. The compensation of
the asset managers is here on top of the slide, and it actually comes out of another project
that we are working on in which we endogenize compensation and
talk about welfare. But for this project, we take it exogenously. The way compensation looks in the other project is
that it depends on the absolute performance of
the manager's portfolio, depends on the
relative performance relative to a benchmark
of the portfolio, and has a part independent of the
performance of portfolio, for example, based on
assets under management. Now the most important
element from this compensation
for us in this paper is the relative performance one, and b here is the fee for sensitivity to
relative performance. We have data supporting
these specifications. This paper just
came out in the JF, supporting the
compensation structure that we look at here. Now let's do the same analysis, but in the economy
with asset managers. Let us place Asset 1 in the benchmark and leave
Asset 2 and Asset y outside. This doesn't change
portfolio choice of conventional investors, they still want a
mean-variance portfolio, but it does change the portfolio choice
of asset managers. Other things equal, the
asset managers will demand more of the first asset, which is in the benchmark, this red term here, then the asset that is
outside the benchmark. This red term represents the optimal response
to benchmarking from asset managers. More generally speaking, in anticipating the general
version of the model, the asset managers will invest its risky assets
in two portfolios, the mean-variance portfolio and the benchmark portfolio,
which is here. Now this result is very general, we know that it works also
for other preferences. It also works in a
multi-period setting. This is simple Merton's ICAPM, and you can think
about this benchmark as a hedging portfolio, it hedges underperformance
relative to benchmark. Now notice that this
additional demand from the manager because of
his performance evaluation, the red term, does not depend at
all on the risk and return characteristics
of the assets. It only depends on the
contract parameters, that's why we call it
the mechanical demand. This parameter b, the sensitivity to
relative performance, the way to think about it
is set b equal to infinity. We will think about this
manager as a passive manager, that manager will invest everything in the
benchmark portfolio. If b is less than infinity, the manager will split
the fund between the benchmark portfolio and
the mean-variance portfolio. These managers have this
mechanical demand for Stock 1, which will essentially reduce the available supply of
Stock 1 in the market, pushing up its price. You see exactly that
happening in equilibrium, the price of Stock 1
has this red term here, which the way to read it is that the price of Stock 1 is higher than the price of Stock 2 everything else
equal or Asset y. Why? Because of this
additional demand from asset managers. Now let's come back to
our thought experiment of combining firms. Let us first take Firm 2, which is outside
the benchmark and combine it with Asset y. This merger naturally leaves
y outside the benchmark. In this economy, we
can again compute portfolio demands for
the combined assets. You can see that there
are no red terms here, they look very similar
to what you have seen in the economy
without asset managers. For that reason, the price
of the combined asset will be equal to the sum of the prices of these
two standalones. Now let's get things cooking and combine Firm 1, which is in the
benchmark, with Asset y. Notice that this effectively brings Asset y into
the benchmark. That Firm 1 is the only firm has the
technology to do that. Investors cannot do
it on their own. Look at the optimal demands, no effect on the demand for
the conventional investors. But there is a familiar term in the demand of asset managers. Now, if you compare the price of the combined asset to the
sum of the two standalones, you will see that the
combined ones is worth more than the two standalones. The bolt terms
here is the wedge, which we call the benchmark
inclusion subsidy. You can already start noticing
in this simple model, what this subsidy depends on. It depends on the
riskiness of the project. The riskier the project, the more valuable this
mechanical demand is. It also depends on Lambda AM, which is assets under management following the benchmark, the higher it is, the
bigger the effect. Now just stepping aside, there are no cash flow synergy in this model by construction. What we have here is a
pure financial synergy, which is something we tell
our students does not exist. In this model ignoring
it would be a mistake. Very quickly, summarize
what we have seen so far. As you can see, all the effects go through the discount rate, through the cost of capital. We claim that the cost of
capital is different for the firms inside the benchmark
and the firm outside. NPV of an investment depends on the entity that is
considering that investment. In particular, benchmark
firms will undertake acquisitions than
non-benchmark firms would not. The subsidy is increasing
in the riskiness. The riskier the acquisition, the higher the benchmark
conclusion subsidy. Already in this simple model, you can think about
spinoffs that the asset lands outside
the benchmark. As it lands outside, it loses part of its value. Now let's go for a more
general model with N assets K inside the benchmark. y can now be a project,
an acquisition, anything and we allow for the
correlation among assets. Let's make the firm
inside and outside the benchmark
otherwise identical just for presentation purposes. Let me show you what this benchmark inclusion subsidy is. This is the value of the project for the form inside
the benchmark, this is the value of the project for the form outside
the benchmark. Some of the black terms we have seen already in my
simple example. What we have to add
here is the red term, which has to do with
the correlation Rho of the project with the cash
flows of the assets in place. Let me first run over the empirical implications and then I will give you
some intuitions. This benchmark inclusion
subsidy here is the formula for you and this is the key to our
cross-sectional implications. We know that it's positive if the correlation of
the project with the cash-flow from
existing assets is positive or at least
not too negative. That's an empirically
plausible case. Now in case you're
wondering whether we have thought of a way of creating value for T-bills by having benchmark
firms buy them, no we can't do that, we are not magicians. The T-Bills are riskless assets are discounted using
the risk-free rate. There is no effect on the risk in the riskless projects. It always tied to risk. The subsidy is larger if
the project cash flows are more correlated with the cash flows from the
firm's existing business. The best that the
firm can do is to undertake loans of
existing assets, open more Starbucks
branches, kind of thing. It is also higher, the subsidy when the market
risk aversion is high. This is when this
mechanical demand is the most valuable. It is also larger if assets
under management are large. For benchmarks for which we have the largest AUM following them, this is our prediction. These are the firms for which we will see the largest effects. This parameter b, I
told you that this is one way to think of the manager
being active or passive. The higher the b is, the more passive managers are. Therefore, they will have bigger mechanical demand and therefore, will increase our benchmark
inclusion subsidy. We also have a version of the paper where we
separate managers into active and passive and make this point a
little bit clearer. Now to the intuitions
on the correlations. We already know that stocks of firms inside the benchmark are overpriced because of the private reasons of these asset managers
to hold the stocks. Now think of the
conventional investors. They want exposure to cash
flows of benchmark stocks. But instead of buying
this over-priced stocks, they would rather go for
a cheaper substitute, a form outside the benchmark, but with cash flows
highly positively correlated with the ones
of the benchmark firm. Naturally in equilibrium,
the price of that stock outside the
benchmark will also be higher. Now with these
correlations our subsidy spreads across to all stocks. This is true for all stocks, not just stocks inside
the benchmark. Then this is also
true for projects. You can think of the
projects that have cash flows that are correlated with those of benchmark firms, those projects will
be valued higher. This is the theory paper, but we have tried to gather
empirical evidence that would help us understand
their implications. There is a literature
on the index effect, and clearly our model is consistent with
the index effect. But the empirical literature
on the index effect just measures the average
effect of index inclusion. What we've got to say is
the also the cross-section how this index effect
should vary across firms. Now, our model says that it is the benchmark
that should matter, and not the index. Usually, it's fairly difficult
to disentangle the two, but thanks to the word
ESG has been spoken, socially responsible
investing and let me do a plug for Marcin
that he couldn't do. He has a very nice
paper on sin stocks, alcohol, tobacco, these stocks that are shunned by socially
responsible investors. They're out of their benchmarks, but they're still in the index. Marcin and Harrison, they find that the price valuations
of these stocks are 15-20 percent lower than
their peers that are non-sin. I'm very much consistent
with our story. Now there is a paper
by Bena et al that we really like because it fully
supports our implications. They argue that benchmark
firms, they invest more, they employ more people, and they accept more
riskier projects using cross-country data. Finally, a nice test
for our Lambda AM, AUM of asset managers metering is this paper by Chang, Hong, and Liskovich where they
look at movements from the Russell 2000 to the
Russell 1000 Index. When a company is doing
well and moves from Russell 2000 to Russell 1000
Index, its price falls. It falls by five percent, even though its cash
flows have improved. Our story is that
that Russell 2000 is a much bigger index
than Russell, 1000 and that would explain the fall in the stock price. Now very briefly, I know
I'm running out of time. Let me show you a bit
of our magnitudes. We do not calibrate the
model the way it is. We just do the Gordon
Growth Model calibration, which we can calibrate. We can look at the
stock increases based on the index
inclusion literature, which gives us a six
percent stock increase, or based on margins
paper which gives us a 15-20 percent increase. This is our range and
the rest is completely a standard from the
Gordon Growth Model. This is the range
that we get for the subsidy translated into the decrease in the
cost of capital. The range that we like or
that we think is reasonable, ranges from 30 basis points
to about 95 basis points. This is consistent
with a recent paper by Calomiris, he sent it to us, and he looks at these
effect empirically estimated emerging
market bonds and find the difference in the cost of borrowing of index
eligible bond relative to cost of borrowing by
the same firm but elsewhere over a
100 basis points. That's his headline result. Let me not say anything else. Let me just conclude saying
that we do have a host of empirical implications which we think would be nice to test. Let me just say that the asset management
sector is very big. We hope that we have put our finger on an
important distortion. As the asset management
sector continues to grow, this distortion will
only get bigger. 