Alan J. Auerbach: I'm very
pleased to be here to give the Martin Feldstein Lecture at the NBER Summer Institute. Of course, Martin was my
dissertation advisor and a co-author and I learned a
lot from him over the years. Indeed, I want to
start in talking about the taxation of
business income in the global economy with a couple of Marti's contributions
over the years in the area. Not simply to remind us how versatile Marti
was in his research, but also because the
points he made in these papers relate to the material I'm going to
be talking about today. The first of these
contributions is one paper that Marti wrote with David Hartman in the late 1970s in the quarterly
Journal of Economics, in which Feldstein and Hartman
derived optimal taxation of domestic and
foreign source income for multinational companies. A key thing in
these results other than the results themselves, was the implicit assumption
that companies residents is well-determined and
where are they earn their income is also
easily determined. Both of those things are, while perhaps quite
sensible assumptions in the 1970s are not
so sensible today. The second contribution of
Marti's I want to highlight is from a paper with Paul Krugman in NBER
conference volume. In this paper, the
international trade effects evaluated taxation. There's a particular quote
that I wanted to highlight, "The point of the
analysis is more modest. We want to show that commonly
held belief that a VAT is a disguised
protectionist policies based on a misunderstanding." That was a very important
point to make them. Unfortunately, it's a point, it's still applies today when policymakers debate the merits of not only evaluated taxes, but of other consumption destination based
taxes and that came up in the US tax reform
debate a few years ago and still plagues policy
discussions in this area. I'll come back and talk
about that as well. But to begin, let me
start with a figure which is common to discussions of international taxation today. This is the G7
corporate tax rates according to OECD data, going back a few decades. You would get similar
picture if you looked at other groups
of developed countries, it's not unique to the G7. What you can see is that corporate tax rates have been declining throughout the
G7 over this period. Starting from a much
higher range in the early to mid 1990s
than they are now. It's worth pointing
out that although the United States drop in 2017 occurred during a
Republican administration, in several of the
other countries where tax rates have come down, they've done so under
left-leaning governments. It really is a phenomenon
that is not so much related to the
specific politics of the time and the country, but rather to something
more fundamental. That fundamental thing
that it relates to is the change in the economy, the world economy
over this period. Let me talk a little
bit about that. The best way for me to
start to illustrate what's happened in the world
economy in particular, in the US economy, is to think about the
largest companies by market capitalization in the
US 50 years ago and today. Fifty years ago the
top five companies were mostly names that
are still familiar. IBM, General Motors, AT&T, Exxon Mobil,
and Eastman Kodak. A couple of things to
point out about this. First of all, Exxon Mobil was actually at that time
pre merger with Mobil. Also AT&T wasn't the
AT&T today it was the enormous regulated
monopoly providing telephone services and actually providing manufacturing
and providing telephones. In 1971, companies, although they may have
relied on technology, IBM was certainly a leading technology company at the time, were companies that made things, they made things in
identifiable locations. Then that's not just true
of oil companies where the location of extraction of natural resources is clear. But it's also true of where General Motors made its cars. If we shift to 2021, we see another five
familiar names, all very giant companies, Apple, Microsoft,
Amazon, Alphabet, and Facebook and all familiar, perhaps not Alphabet for some, because Alphabet is the
parent company of Google. These companies are enormous and worldwide
multinationals. They rely very heavily on
intellectual property, all of them in the services
and goods that they provide. Just to highlight that point, let me make a couple of
observations based on data. In the last half century
during this same period when the identity of
these five companies changed as I just showed you, the share of
intellectual property measured in US non-financial
corporate assets, according to the Fed's flow of funds data, more than doubled. That's probably a
conservative estimate because the measurement of
intellectual property is a fairly narrow one here. The share of before tax
US corporate profits coming from overseas
operations nearly quintupled. That is, companies, the US corporate
sector became much more multinational in character, not just selling things abroad, but making them abroad as well. In the share of cross-border
equity ownership has steadily increased
as indicated in the link here in this slide. What of all these facts imply? Well, there are a few
important implications for tax policy that
I'd like to draw. First of all, these
changes have put increased pressure
on tax systems that are based on
corporate residents. Its natural course to think of individuals as residents
of particular countries. But our income tax system also identifies corporations
by where they reside. In 1971, it may have been pretty obvious what a US
company was and what it wasn't in
terms of who owned the company and where it produced that's
much less true now. There's much greater
multinational activity of companies that are
said to reside in the United States
and they have many more shareholders
from abroad as well. These two factors mean
it's easier to engage in so-called corporate
inversion that is to change the corporate residents through corporate reorganization
as a company might want to do if being a resident of a particular
country or the US or some other country is disadvantageous from
a tax perspective. A second implication for
tax policy is that there's increased pressure on taxes does based on where
companies produce. The location of production
is easier to change now because companies already
have internal supply chains. They're not just
producing in the US or mostly in the US. They're producing around
the world already. If they want to shift production from one
location to another, they already have existing operations to make that easier. Moreover, because
they're manufacturing things like microchips and pharmaceuticals and
indeed services versus heavy things
like autos and steel, they don't have to
worry about location as much in terms of
transportation costs. Finally, there's
increased pressure on tax systems based on where companies report their profits. Here I'm emphasizing
where they report their profits as opposed
to where they produce. That is, we normally think of companies as earning profits
where they produced. But one of the problems that governments face today
is that companies may produce in one location
and the report that profits deriving from those
activities and another. Companies can shift
profits among parts of their overall enterprise because they have operations
in so many countries. If some of these
operations are in low tax countries having
operations they are already makes it easier
for them to shift profits where they report
profits to those locations. It's particularly easy
when we're thinking about income being generated by an intellectual property. Because intellectual
property has no logical location
in the same way, we may know or a factory is. But it's a lot harder
to say where a piece of intellectual property is or
is being used in production. Now I should just
add a point here. There have been some
estimates in the literature recently if how much
profit shifting there is suggesting that it's
occurring on a vast scale. There's some potential
problems with some of this research associated
with difficulties of interpreting some
government data. I'll just flag that as
something that one should think about when looking at some of the results in
this literature. Nevertheless, it doesn't take away from the point that
this is an important issue. It's one that certainly
drives thinking about tax reform. We have a situation where the existing tax systems, the ones that we
have traditionally used for decades in the US and elsewhere to tax corporations based on where
corporations reside, where they produce, where
they earn their profits. This seems like an unstable
situation because of the evolution of
the world economy so what are the
options for reform? Well, there are
several that have been tried and some that
have been proposed. The most common one are
so-called anti-avoidance rules. Tax officials simply come up with ways to get
tough on companies. Tightened rules to
limit profit shifting, put in place various rules that simply make life harder for companies that want to shift where they
report their profits. There are a variety of
mechanisms that are already in place to do this but such mechanisms have
adverse effects. If you make it harder
for a company that's producing in the US to report profits in a
lower tax country, that shifts more of the
profits to the US perhaps. It also increases the
effective tax rate that the company faces may make them more
sensitive to the US tax rate. That's not to say, one shouldn't adopt
anti-avoidance rules, but it's not an unmitigated
benefit for tax authorities. Likewise, the US has been trying to come up
with rules to limit inversions and
these rules exist, but they are becoming
increasingly complicated as
corporations come up with different ways and different strategies for
changing presidents. A second approach
that has been used, especially in Europe, has been to come up with so-called patent boxes
or intellectual special, favorable intellectual
property regimes. The ideas, if it's income associated with
intellectual property that is particularly sensitive
to different tax rates and typically difficult for
a tax authorities to locate, then maybe government should
impose lower tax rates on such income as a
way of admitting that they're not going to be able to impose this
higher tax rate. Also, governments justify such favorable regimes
using the argument that intellectual
property may development, and may produce social
spillovers in terms of productivity for other
parts of the economy. Here's just an illustration or recent illustration
of some of the patent boxes in place in Europe and the
tax rates that apply. Now one of the problems with
patent boxes is in a sense, it's a way of dealing
with competition, tax competition by giving up. That is saying if we tax
competition is a problem, and so we're just going to
engage in tax competition, or be it for part of the income of companies,
not all of it. But also in terms of
the other argument for patent boxes that there
are social spillovers. Research suggests that
companies are responding to these favorable regimes by locating intellectual
property income in favorable places but not necessarily doing the
research and development in those places that
would be associated with both social
spillovers so this isn't an obvious
fundamental solution to the problem of tax
competition either. A recent proposal or series of proposals
and indeed policies adopted beginning
in Europe has been to target largely
US multinationals, tech multinationals, with new separate taxes on gross receipts based on
where their users are. The argument is companies like Google or Facebook
have lots of users and just to a company
like Germany or France. Yet by traditional
income tax rules, they don't have what's called a nexus in those countries, they don't really engage in any traditional production
operations there. Therefore by standard
income tax rules, they don't owe anything
to those countries, which doesn't make those
countries very happy. They've simply come up
with an adhoc solution, digital surface taxes to tax them based on
whether users are. In several individual
countries, starting in Europe, but not exclusively
European countries have adopted these and indeed the European Union
as a whole has been moving forward
with such an idea. Here are examples
of countries at various stages of adoption
of digital service taxes. A fourth approach is
destination-based taxes. It's related to the
digital services idea, but it's a much more
fundamental one, but it's not based simply
on the provision of digital services it could
apply to any company. It's to focus the tax base not on where companies reside, where they report their
profits, where they produce, but on where their sales are, where their consumers are. Because consumers are relatively immobile and so by imposing
a tax based on destination, it's likely to be
less susceptible to a competition over tax
rates among countries. Because competing for
corporate profits or for production
location is likely to be much more intense than
trying to get people to move across borders to take
advantage of lower tax rates. The main existing tax
based on destination, the value-added tax shows
little susceptibility to the tax rate competition like the kind I showed you
for the corporate tax, and indeed, here is a slide for value-added
taxes and the G7. Of course, there are
only six countries represented here because the United States
alone among the G7 and indeed alone among
a much larger group of developed countries, does not have a value-added tax, does not have a national destination-based
consumption tax. But you'll see here there's
no obvious downward trend in these taxes and indeed, some of the blips downward represent counter-cyclical
policies, such as the United
Kingdom during the global financial crisis. If you omit those drops, there's probably
an upward trend, if any trend at all
in these rates. That confirms that you
don't see the same kind of tax competition here as you
do for corporate tax rates. That's not necessarily
because it's a tax on consumption rather
than a tax on income, but because it's a tax based on destination rather than on
the location of earnings. Now because of the reduced focus on residence or
location in production, the unilateral adoption
by one country might actually push other
countries in that direction. If the US, for example, were to move its corporate tax to one based on destination, it would encourage more
companies to produce and report their profits in the United States because
they would no longer be subject to tax based
on those actions. That might be
self-reinforcing to get other countries
to do it too. It's a form of tax competition, but it doesn't necessarily
require a low tax rate, simply a different tax base. What I think is an
important and overlooked objective international
tax policy discussions, which is the idea
that in addition to all the other things we'd
like tax systems to have, efficiency, equity, ease
and administration. Incentive compatibility
is important too. That is, countries perceiving it to be in their own
best interests to adopt a tax system without having to be
coerced by others. Now, this role of destination-based
taxation in tax reform and the importance of
incentive compatibility, is something that's
emphasized in the book that I and several
collaborators shown here, recently published with
Oxford University Press. Indeed this book is not
only available from Oxford University
Press in hard-copy, but if you are willing to live
with a PDF file, instead, you can download it for free, by arrangement with
Oxford University Press. In this book, which we produced over a
period of several years, we put forward in addition
to the general idea of destination-based taxation being an important
potential step in tax reform, we hammered out two
specific proposals of how to get there. One big, one small. The small one is that is small relative to
the current system, is the idea of taxing residual profits based on the
location of sales income. Income from sales. Which we call the RPAI. The other is a destination-based
cash flow tax, DBCFT, which came up in policy
discussions in the United States a few years ago and
that would represent a much bigger change toward
destination-based taxation. Let me explain each of
these a little bit. The RPAI is a hybrid system. It would say for routine
operations that companies do where they're just doing
traditional production, easily identified
using tangible assets and probably not earning a particularly high
rate of return, the old system probably
still works pretty well. We can tax that based on where companies report that they are producing and
earning profits. But then there are a lot
of residual earnings that will remain for companies after these routine
profits are taken out. That's especially true for the companies that are the
biggest companies in the US. The tech companies that
I showed you earlier. Allocating routine earnings
for these companies would not account for a very large
share of their earnings. For those earnings, we would allocate based on the location
of net sales revenues. It's a form of partial
apportionment system, which for those of us who
live in the United States, is familiar from the way
states tax corporate income. We have apportionment in the US of among the
states of all income, not just residual income. We have been moving steadily
as the States choose their own ways of apportioning toward using
sales apportionment. That is, there's no coercion or national coordination
among States. States have been choosing how to apportion income among them. They have chosen sales, they've chosen destination
because of the attractiveness that exists for using
destination as a way of determining where
to tax income. That confirms that the idea
of incentive compatibility. That is, states have gotten
two sales apportioned taxation of income without
any national coordination. The destination-based
cash flow tax would start by imposing a cash flow tax
on domestic operations. It would impose so-called
border adjustments, eliminating the import deduction
and the tax on exports. These border adjustments would work precisely as they do under existing
value-added taxes. What border adjustment
does is two things. First of all, it
shifts the location of tax from production
to consumption. That is, things consumed in the United States would be taxed in the United States even if produced elsewhere and
things produced in the United States but consumed elsewhere wouldn't be taxed. That's what border
adjustments do. But of equal importance of border adjustments would eliminate profit
shifting opportunities. Because transactions
with related parties in other countries would not be part of the tax calculation
the companies would do. Therefore, any
misstatement of where the profits are earned or
how the big the profits are, or borrowing and lending that companies do
among related parties, none of those things
would have any impact on the taxes due when a country adopted a DBCFT. Now, the DBCFT is a profits tax, but it's equivalent
to evaluated tax with one important difference, which is it doesn't tax
the wage component. The wage and salary
component of value-added. In that sense, it's a tax on profits rather than a
tax on value-added, and that makes it much
more progressive. Indeed, one can show that it's equivalent that the destination-based cash
flow tax is equivalent to a onetime tax on the wealth of residents through taxing the future cash flows
that they receive. Now, the DBCFT, as I mentioned, was proposed in the United
States in 2016 during the discussion leading up to the Tax Cuts and Jobs
Act passed in 2017. It was not implemented
because of several concerns. Some including the short-run
effects associated with exchange rate adjustment that would have needed to occur. I think legitimate
concerns and there were differences in opinion of
how important these were. Concerns about a
possible WTO reaction. I think here I would
just highlight that the problems have to
do really with the way the WTO rules are structured in the sense of emphasizing
form over substance. Because the equivalents
of the DBCFT do, are perfectly acceptable tax
systems under WTO rules, should've made the DBCFT
acceptable as well. But they were reasonable
concerns that wouldn't have been true given the
way the WTO operates. Finally, and I have
to emphasize this and this relates
to the Feldstein, Krugman quote that
I gave you earlier. There was just a general lack of understanding of the
plans operation, it's incidence and
its economic impact. Indeed, there was a view
that it was protectionist, that it was very pro-export
and very anti-import. Things that economists generally understand are not true. But we're very hard to convey
in the public discussion. The final approach in terms of things that
have been tried or suggested as a way of dealing with the current problems of our tax system is
the kitchen sink, which is how I would describe
the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Because it had a little
bit of everything. It reduced the
corporate tax rate, just simply continuing
tax competition. It introduced some additional
tax avoidance measures by introducing a global
minimum tax on US companies because it was
just a US tax law. It introduced something
with the acronym GILTI. Taxing income earned abroad by US companies if that income
was taxed at too low a rate. It introduced investment
expensing and targeted border adjustments
on exports and imports borrowing
from the DBCFT. Even though that wasn't
introduced in law, some of the ideas
and the reasons for those ideas did find their way into the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act. It didn't have a
unified logical basis. It borrowed from
different ideas, but also it's not really
a stable situation. It's not a stable
situation for the US and it's not stable
for the world either. It generated a tax revenue
loss for the United States, which we certainly need revenue at this point and
there was concern about that. It discourages US
residents because the minimum tax was
adopted by the US alone, not by other countries
and therefore, it could be avoided by not
being a US resident company. Finally, there was no measure in it to deal with
digital services, which was less of a concern
for the US, but remember, these are US companies that largely would be hit by the
digital services taxes being proposed elsewhere and so not coming up with a
solution for that is certainly something
that will not leave other countries
happy with the outcome. Finally, that brings us
to where we are now, which is the initiative
taking place over many years, reaching a crescendo this year. A process put in
place by the OECD, which they referred to as
a two pillar proposal. Now I have to pause here and say that we don't normally think about the tax system in
the US as having pillars. When I've heard
this discussion of two pillars and
how it would work, presumably the idea is that
there's two pillars that are going to hold up the
world tax structure, but a different picture comes to my mind based on the story
from the Old Testament, which is the story of
Samson and the two pillars. Of course, Samson,
his activity with the two pillars was not to
use them to hold anything up, but rather to bring
down the temple of the Philistines and the
Philistines with that action. I'm not sure that the OECD would necessarily
appreciate this analogy, but if one continues
a little bit longer and thinks about whom Samson
might be in this situation, perhaps it might be the
Republic of Ireland or one of the other countries
that has not yet signed on and become a member of the coalition of the
willing in this initiative. I'll come back and talk
about that process shortly. Let me describe how
this would work. Pillar 1 is essentially
a replacement for the digital service taxes
that many countries, especially in Europe and the European Union
itself have proposed. It would allocate
to market countries a fraction of profits
above the threshold, so 20-30 percent of profits above 10 percent
of sales revenues. But only of extremely
large companies, those with over £20 billion
a year in annual revenues. It would exclude financial
services companies and those in
extractive industry, some of which are
also very large. By its nature, it
really is targeted very much at tech companies and
indeed US tech companies. Pillar 2 would be a
global minimum tax along the lines of what the US adopted in 2017 with some
important differences. It would be at least
15 percent imposed above a threshold seven and a half percent
of tangible assets plus payroll for large
multinationals, not as large as Pillar 1, but greater than £750 million
a year in annual revenues. Pillar 2 also includes some other provisions which
would encourage countries to adopt it because
remaining outside of the general agreement would impose a penalty on
those countries. Say a little bit
more about Pillar 1. Estimates suggest that if the aim was to target
largely US multinationals, it seems pretty successful. These estimates suggest
around close to two-thirds of global tax revenues would be
generated by US companies. Half of that amount would come from five
companies: Apple, Microsoft, Alphabet,
Intel, and Facebook. It does relate to one of the other proposals I suggested in being destination based, like the RPAI proposal, the hybrid proposal that my
group and I put forward, but it's much more limited. It only applies to
a small number of extremely large tech
companies and it allocates only 20-30 percent of excess profits
rather than all. However, as I'll come back to, one might think of this
as a first step in a direction adopting the
principle more broadly. Pillar 2 is, as I said, a little bit like the
US GILTI provision. But it would be tougher because it would impose a
higher tax rate. On the other hand, it
doesn't go as far as the proposal put forward by the Biden administration
earlier this year, which would have had a tax rate of 21 percent and
indeed would have had no threshold over which
taxes would be assessed. Really that was aimed
much more not just at companies shifting profits
to low tax countries, but really at companies shifting production activities
themselves. It was aimed at a broader array of activities of companies
that involve tax competition. Well, this brings us to an important question. Can the agreement
work? Should it work? There are immediate questions
one should ask about this. That is, we might never
get off the ground. Among these are whether the US can get treaty
approval for Pillar 1. The US has a variety
of treaties with other countries indicating who has the right to tax income, and Pillar 1 as an income tax, but one based on destination, would be a seating
taxing authority to countries which as I said, have no taxable nexus under standard income tax rules for collecting tax
from these companies. In order for this to work, and for the US to allow
other countries to do this, they would have to be a
renegotiation of treaties. Even though the
Biden administration has come out in
favor of Pillar 1, the Biden administration
alone doesn't get to decide whether we
have a new treaty. It has to be approved
by 2/3 of the Senate. This is not something that can go through reconciliation. Most likely, and therefore
is likely to be difficult. It's important to
keep that in mind because many of the countries who have agreed to
the overall package, including Pillars 1 and
2 to agree to Pillar 2 in exchange for
getting Pillar 1. If Pillar 1 doesn't happen, we don't know what will
happen to Pillar 2. A second question just from the US perspective is
whether the US can get the minimum tax being proposed through reconciliation, which would require 50
votes in the US Senate. We know it can't get it through a regular legislative
process outside of reconciliation because
the US doesn't have 60 votes in the
Senate to approve that. But even 50 votes is tight and it's hard to know
whether that'll happen. Finally, can Europe
achieve unanimity? The European rules for adopting this tax reform
require unanimity, and I highlighted
Ireland before, but Ireland isn't the
only member country of the European Union that has yet to sign on to
this agreement. Without Europe being able to coerce or bribe these holdouts, it's not clear how Europe
would join this agreement, even though in principle
has said it will. These are all short-run
concerns that could cause the agreement to
not reach fruition. But there's also a more
fundamental challenge in the longer-term arising from the attempt to
preserve a tax system, which is fundamentally based on concepts that don't
really work anymore, that are ill-defined
and endogenous. Corporate residents
and the location of production and profits, something that tax
authorities have taken to calling the location of value creation as if somehow
that is easily identified. Because it relies on these ill-defined concepts and concepts that are
difficult to measure, it's really not going to be very sustainable unless
countries adopt and adhere to similar rules. That lesson incentives
for companies to shift production
profits or residents. What does that require? It requires that countries adopt similar minimum tax rates and bases across home countries, so that the base and then
the rate together provide similar effective tax rates
to less than the incentives for companies to shift
corporate residence because the residents determines which minimum tax applies to you. If the rates are similar, there's not a strong incentive to move corporate residents, but only if the
rates are similar. You need similar
corporate tax rates and tax basis in the
countries themselves, the regular corporate
tax rates in basis to prevent companies from shifting their
production and profits location from one
country to another. Even if these countries
are not low tax countries, that would be subject
to the minimum tax. Differences in tax rates
between the US and some other economy without
a very low tax rate, there might still be big enough differences in
these tax rates and tax basis to encourage shifting of profits in production. Finally, you need a
similar regular tax rate in the country itself, and the minimum tax
rate that country applies to keep companies that are resident in
those countries from shifting their profits and
their production abroad. This is relevant, for example, for the United States, where we've agreed to a
15 percent minimum tax. But the Biden administration has at least currently
still proposing a 28 percent tax rate
on domestic income. A big difference from
the minimum tax rate. Well, what should
these values be? There has been so much focus on that is these common values. There's been so much focus on the objective if you're
eliminating tax competition. That one can easily lose sight
of the fact that limiting tax competition isn't the only or the major objective
of tax policy. There are many other
objectives as well, and one needs to think about the other
objectives to think about whether the corporate
tax rates should be 21 percent, 28 percent, 35 percent, whether the minimum tax rate
should be 15 percent, 21 percent as it was
originally proposed, whether the tax base should
have a threshold or not. These are all questions
that can only be answered if one thinks about what governments
are trying to achieve, what they're trying
to achieve in terms of encouraging saving
and investment, how much revenue they need
from the corporate sector. These are not questions that are addressed in simply
agreeing to have the same values,
but unfortunately, wanting to pursue other
objectives as well as reducing tax competition
is likely to lead countries in
different situations with different objectives
in different directions. Now, if countries
instead had moved in the direction or more in the direction of
destination based taxation, governments could pursue
different objectives without worrying about
tax competition. For example, if
the US had adopted a destination-based
cash flow tax, it could have kept its 35
percent tax rate in 2017. It wouldn't have
had to worry about tax competition and lowered
its tax rate to 21 percent. Other countries
seeking more revenue or less revenue could adjust
their tax rate up or down. Countries would have a freedom
that they don't have in the current situation or under the proposed
two-pillar agreement. Where does that leave us? Well, I'm not going to
make the mistake of trying to predict what happens
in the short run. How far we get
with Pillars 1 and 2 and the proposed
international agreement. But what I will say
is that I think over the longer term, whatever the success
and the short-run in getting this agreement
adopted widely, they will still continue to be pressures of a type I just discussed for countries to
move in opposite directions. I think part of
that movement will be a further movement in the direction of
destination-based taxation. I mentioned that the 2017
tax cuts and jobs act did include certain pieces taken from the destination-based
cash flow tax, and I think that such ideas will continue to be part of tax policy and
perhaps expanded. I think it's quite
possible that Pillar 1, although very narrow as proposed because it's
really just meant to replace the Digital
Service taxes that had been proposed
and adopted can grow, and countries, once they see
that it works pretty well, may want to lower
the threshold and make it so that it applies to a much larger group
of companies. If once these movements toward destination-based
taxation take place, it's going to not only give countries more revenue
from these sources, but it's going to
lessen the need for other measures
like minimum taxes. Because minimum
taxes really aren't needed when countries are relying more on
destination and less on location of
production and profits. I think that's going to put the less revenue needed because of more revenue from
destination-based taxation, and the less need for to
backstop the tax system. Because of destination-based
taxation will put further pressure on minimum taxes to
whatever extent they're adopted as countries see them as a nuisance that
doesn't really serve any unnecessary purpose as the tax systems naturally
evolve it worldwide. With that, I thank you again
for listening to this talk. 