Welcome everyone. Thanks for joining. In this video we'll be going over
how to run a Celestia Light node. You may have seen the tweets recently
of people running them in new locations on new devices, and of course the memes
with pets and teletubbies and everything in the world running a light node. Yeah, let's get started. First thing you'll need to do is
head over to docs.celestia.org and go to the "Run a Node" category. In the "Quick start" section, there
is a page for "Docker images", and the only prerequisite we'll have
for this tutorial is that you have Docker installed on your machine. If you don't have Docker already, go
ahead and click the the link to Docker, which will take you to the installation
page where you can install Docker desktop for Mac, Windows, or Linux. Now that you have Docker installed,
we're gonna skip to the second section of the tutorial for a
light node with persistent storage. This is going to allow us to use the
same key and same data store every time we start the node so that it doesn't
start reining from scratch every time. The first thing we'll need to
do is open up our terminal. I'm using Warp. You can use any terminal of
your choosing, and we're gonna paste in the first command. What the first command does is creates a
directory or a folder for a node store. Now the next thing we'll need
to do is initialize our node store and key in that directory. The first command will generate. Or initialize the node store
and then generate a key for you. The public address or the address
is the public key that other people can use to identify you. That's the thing that shows
up on block explorers. And then mnemonic is the thing that you
don't want to give away, and you might wanna write it down on paper if you're
gonna ever use this key for anything real. Yeah. Next thing we'll need to do is
start the node and we can copy the second command to do that. And there's a little bit of a bug right
now, so we're actually not gonna be able to get that to start on the first try. So if you do "Control + C",
it'll cancel it. And we just do the same command
again, and it'll start up and we're gonna see those nice logs that
everyone's been sharing on Twitter. Yeah. If you enjoyed this
video, please share it. If you have any questions,
please ask in the comments. That's how to run a Celestia
light node in a few minutes. Thanks. 