Robert C. Merton: Well,
this is a great treat. I'll tell you what I'm
going to talk about. As you can see,
finance, science, innovation, and
long-term investing. After all, that's what
this whole thing is about, but we are here in the
Royal Society of London. As you heard from Jim, this is where modern
science system. I have to say a word
about finance science. Everything I'm saying
here is not scientific. It's my judgment or my belief. I think finance is
a science for sure, but I think it was not a
science until the 1950s. Before that, it
had no real data, so how can you have
a science if you can't really test anything? Two, the only controversy was whether you should
use present value or internal rate of return. If you look at fun today, that's an afternoon's
discussion to settle. Because the only way you
can test the internal rate of return if you haven't
done is to first compute the present value
to see if it's giving you the right answer so that
tells you what the answer is, but it was just a bunch
of accounting again, but I labeled the beginning of the 1950s and if I had to
pick one piece of work, it was Harry Markowitz's
portfolio 1952. That was beginning.
She had organized model definition of risk, something was quantified, there was a theory there, and it was put together. I'm not going to go
through the whole list, don't worry, but you
could fill it out. Second, I would say in time was Ken Arrow's 1953 paper on
the role of securities. You could go through
Modigliani-Miller, Tobin, addition to Markowitz's, all the way through the '50s, and then you could go into
the '60s and of course, on the data side was the
incredible crisp data that was put together every stock
price from 1926 to the '60s. Never been done
before and the first thing, and I won't go
through all of that, was I don't know if most number here probably could remember it. Most of you weren't
even born then, but the point is that the
first thing they did, which is not surprising, they had all this data
on all these stocks, so they just asked and answered the question
with the data. If I took an average
stock or a random stock, how much would I
have earned through the roaring '20s, depression, World War II, the
whole nine yards, and I remember it
was 9.3 percent. Now, if I'm wrong by
a tenth of a percent, doesn't change the story. You say, okay. That was
a shocker from the data. That was more than
any trust department, or professional money
management through that period, remotely
anybody knew. Now, I don't mean they
didn't have all the data. This really became a science
because then it was a little unfair to compare
a random stock to the trust departments because
it was a risk difference. Along came the CAPM and said, how do you distinguish risk? If it says lower risk, you shouldn't expect
it to do as good as an average risk. You
see what I'm saying? By the end of the '60s, we had all of these.
It was a science. It was organized, it was a
set of principles, theories, and serious data, so you got science. Now, since that time, and it is mentioned here, Jim mentioned it, the Royal Society hasn't
been too friendly. No disrespect to the
social sciences or anything in terms of
having things done here, but they did allow finance
to come to do a whole day. It wasn't just that they
published the paper. They published the
whole day here. That, I think, is
one certification. The other is look
at the number of economics Nobel Prizes that, at least part, if
not the whole thing, cited finance work.
It is pretty high. I don't think we have to argue whether it's the science or not. If it looks like,
then it does it. That was what I wanted
to say, but they transition to what I want
to talk about tonight is that one of the
things that happened in the 1970s was that the
highest level research, highest meaning the
most sophisticated research in theory, and empirical work became inextricably linked with
mainstream finance practice. Prior to that, some
firms had some Klants. You know what they
did with them? They put them in a room and when they
brought clients in, they said, here's the Picasso. They opened the door,
here are the Klants, close the door. They
felt a little alone. That's where the
Cube Group came from if you know what
the Cube Group is, which is now very establishment, but there was a bunch of
people getting together who felt a little left out,
if you know what I mean, in their profession, but what
happened in the '70s was there was an enormous set of shocks that came
to the system. The oil shock, Bretton Woods, 10 percent inflation
in the United States, 10 percent interest rates
in the United States, nine percent unemployment
with 10 percent inflation. How would you like
that in the 2008 if you were a central banker? What do you do? There
were a lot of that, but the effect was very
different from 2008. 2008 is you surely will say, well, it's the reactions, let's contrast innovation,
slow it down to do it, we don't need it, it's
bad, it can't help us. 1970s reaction was
just the opposite. You had an acceleration
that I don't think has ever been quite done
that started in the '70s, went well until the '80s, in which you had
enormous innovations that are still affecting our societies today like the
national mortgage market, like all the options and futures markets that
we take for granted. Somebody was talking
about institutions. Until May day of '75, institutions paid
the same commission per share as you would. If you got a 100,000 shares, you paid 1,000 times the commission than if I
bought a 100 shares. It was a monopoly
and they got rid of that and I think that opened the door to the
institutionalization. I won't go on. Arissa, the first index funds, national mortgage market,
all of these things were, and that happened in
the United States. What I would point out to you, just to finish it, what
happened after that? Certainly, every developed
country, but virtually, even emerging markets
created the same markets. They have futures markets, they have options
markets, et cetera. We may have made
a mistake putting all these derivative markets
in during duress in the crisis, but you
can't explain why every country has
adopted them when they weren't under any
duress unless you think they're all crazy,
which is possible, but I think that [inaudible] this forever, or at least
up until this moment, created a bond between
finance science, not people trained in finance. I mean the science
itself, the models, the things that you produce,
and mainstream practice. The option model came out exactly the same time the
option market was created. There was absolutely
no experience in trading options anywhere because they never were traded
at anything except at the money. They had no choice. It was need. Had
it not happened, I believe that's the
source of where this has happened and it's been going on ever since
and of course, it's exemplified by
this wonderful event for which the NBER, bringing all of you
scientists in and, all you from [inaudible]
the largest sovereign. You're managing the largest
sovereign wealth fund in the world and you're here, not just because you're
being nice to academics. Because there has been this unusually
tight relationship between academic research, high level, so forth, and use. I couldn't resist putting that out to you-all
because you're part of this and I
want you to know. I'm going to get to
what I'm going to do. I'm watching the
clock, don't worry. You should worry, but what
was I going to do tonight? I decided that I was going
to try to do something in the exemplifying
this tradition I just described between practice
and research and science, real science, not right on the edge of doing practical work for people
as your after hours, but your science that you
do, cutting edge things, looking at problems, bringing your full creativities to it. I wanted to do that. I'm going to talk about
this evening what I would call a middle-range approach, which is not the most sophisticated empirical
science and certainly, I'm not going to tell
practitioners how to do practice because they actually do it. It's true that a plumber probably knows more about electricity than
a random person, but if you need electrician, get an electrician,
not a plumber. I know a little bit
about practical world. I play it, been in it, but they do it all the time, so I'm not going to
try to replicate that. I'm going to be
somewhere in between. I'm going to try and show you
things I hope that you may have thought about before
and if you haven't, you're going to do it,
and exemplify this, but before I do that, I always have a
footnote, or saying. I have a couple
of things. First, I wanted to talk about in the
spirit of this mid-range, you-all know my papers, or at least you may
not had to read them, but you know them. They exist. You know that I
know how to do it. I'm talking about what I
think about if I'm thinking of a big institution that has
to organize itself to run. Not three guys in a hedge fund, or something, but a
large institution. My way of thinking about, which is not exactly
wrong with theory, but it's not a 100 percent
rigorous all the time, is what you do is you create the optimal
combination of risky assets. I mean by that literally the definition of the highest
sharp ratio of portfolio. The thing that you
do mean variance, or the thing you're
doing, the CAPM. You create that portfolio. Now, there are different
ways you can do that. If you have no information, if you have no special
knowledge, what do you do? The CAPM says, hold
the world portfolio. That's not the same
as an index portfolio because we can't
trade everything. It's a little more clever. But I call that the
well-diversified portfolio. By the way, I say that,
especially because I know Steve Ross spoke last year. We all lost very
important person to us as well as people we really cared
about and a good guy. Steve's arbitrage theory
in that sense said, look, when you get down to it, the CAPM is saying, hold the best-diversified
portfolio that you have until we go to Venus,
that's the world portfolio. But of course, since there's
so many things missing, any one index MSCI,
SOP doesn't matter. You should realize those indices are not the best estimate. Indices have a role. It was touched on
this afternoon. They need it for benchmarks,
and by their nature, to be a benchmark,
they have to be specified precisely
as they're awaiting. That doesn't mean
they're the best one. Tracking error to
an index doesn't mean you somehow are losing. It's important to
measure performance, but not important economically. I want to be clear on that. I think Steve's was
a much better idea. If you have 12 or
14,000 different stocks and you collected
them reasonably, yet, that's a
well-diversified portfolio from around the world, whether they have
the market weights. I'm more impressed
with that than a 200 stock portfolio
this valuated. I'm just telling you
that it's my view of how to read the theory. That's what we're building here. Then if you can
add Alpha to that, and I'm very precise
what I mean by Alpha, because Alpha gets
used for everything. You have 16 factors in Alpha. I mean, the literally
the original Alpha. Alpha exists means I can create the optimal
combination of risky assets, which has the highest
Sharpe ratio portfolio. I can produce something better
than the market portfolio. That's all it's telling us. I'm not going to
go into Alpha now, but you all have said, "This is by the way, there's three ways
to manage risks." I'm telling you this, you
know it, but I'm reminding you. Diversification,
hedging, and insurance, if you've got a fourth one,
tell me, luck doesn't count. I don't know how to
produce that reliably. If you do that, here's where the
diversification comes in. If you had no information, that's what you're doing, holding the best
diversified portfolio. Where does hedging come in? Hedging, which is
different from insuring, is where you give the upside
and the downside both up. That's when you mix
with a risk-free asset. This is standard portfolio there that gives you some optimal for. Now, we have a couple
of more steps, which is what I want
to get to here. We know in a more
expanded theory that there are other variables
which could be price, that is to say,
other risk variables that are not diversifiable, that matter to people. Same ideas, the
market portfolio, but in other dimensions. Interest rate risks, Sharpe ratio risk are you going
to be an environment with large high
Sharpe ratios and high interest rates or flat Sharpe ratios and
low interest rates. That's a risk every
investor has. It's a risk you can't diversify. It's always been there
and always will be. Does that sound like a risk
that you're familiar with? That's the story, you say, why there's a
market risk premium? Will the risk premium
always be the same? No, it is not the same
always for the market, which we know there's one
there; that's a fast pass. We know we have hedging, and then where does
this insurance come in? That's when we modify
the portfolio. We now have the most
efficient portfolio in terms of we're getting the
most bang for our dollar. Then we've maybe adjusted for
exposures to other things. But now, depending on
your objective function, you would say preferences, that's when insuring comes in. Say you want a floor, you have to have an
absolute minimum. But then the upside. What's that shape?
It's non-linear. You can't get that from
a simple portfolio. That's a put option
or a protective put. That's insurance.
That's non-linear. It's different from hedging and it's different from
diversification. That will be determined, you would say preferences. Now here's where I move
to the middle range. I won't ask you, but you don't really
know the preferences of all the current and
future generations of Norway who we were responsible for looking after
or helping out. Even if you did,
even with big data, that's a lot of computing. Where would you get
their utility function? What I think happens is, at least for the
moment, is that, if the other hand,
you don't throw up your hands and say look, we'll just do some
rule of thumb. I think you can say,
you establish goals. Let me give you the
fastest example that big and long-term investors, pension funds, a pension
fund is set up to do what? Meet the liabilities that
have been committed to it. What is the goal of
the pension fund? Its goal would be to pay 100
percent of the liabilities. If it did that,
it's done its job. This is not somebody's
personal portfolio. We're talking about it. Why do I have this portfolio? Because I've had this
portfolio to try to get rid of the liabilities, my goal is to do 100 percent, not 110 percent,
not 120 percent. Would I want more money? Sure, if you give
me everything I want and I'm supposed to be
looking for, plus a boat. Even if I don't have a boat, I would give it away or sell
it if I get it for free, but it never comes for free. I'm trying to remind you that even if you don't
know the preferences, you tend to set goals, the best goals that we know. This is how DB plans are run. They have a goal of trying
to get 100 percent. They may say 80, but that
just changes the level. They may have a floor. We want to try to get
100 percent funding, but we can't get less than 50. That's a typical way of
describing the goal. The goal is 100, but you have a constraint. Do you understand what
I mean by a goal? I can have another goal, which is to pay my
taxes in 90 days. Do you understand what
I mean by a goal? The goals are
implemented by bringing in what we call non-linear
derivatives, options. Now, if you're not
allowed to trade options or they aren't an
option straightaway portfolio, what do we know from finance
science and experience? There is a replication form, and it says there's always a dynamic strategy to
match every derivative. You can run it either way. You can use the derivative to match derivative strategy
if you're trying to minimize a transaction tax or if you can't find
the derivative, you can do the
dynamic replication with error and so forth,
but you can do it. This is just another way
to say they're going to be dynamic mixes of those
two instruments. What if you go back
to the basic finance? I'm doing continuous time here. Let me do it. You've got
to pick a time interval. Sorry, I picked continuous time. What do we know? We know
from the ICPM type thing you always want as one
of your portfolios, a mean-variance
efficient portfolio are called the growth optimal portfolio; it's the same thing. In continuous time, it's
just different scaling. It's the same mix. But then you mix hedging things with it. You're always going to
want this portfolio, but you mix it to deal with all these other instruments so you can replicate the goals. All right, so everybody has
said, that's the process. Now, what's the next
thing I want to say? Goal-based investing is a way
of improving performance. I'm just going to demonstrate
fast because I got a lot to do with you tonight and
you want to get out of here. I know. Let's just
say I have a goal. Would you mind?
You're my client. He's my competitor. He's done good. In fact, I can't get a Sharpe
ratio better than his. Normally, everybody shows
you where they show you out. I can help you get a
better Sharpe ratio. That's what you pay for mostly
outside managers and so. I know you have other things, but that's what a lot
of money is paid for. I can't argue that, but
I want you to hire me. How do I do it? He's got
as a good a Sharpe ratio. You've told us that you
want the best portfolio, best risk-return, but
you've got a floor. If you don't like
the number of zeros, you can put nine or 12 zeros after this so it
gets your attention. We have a payoff. You've told us, both of us, we have to have a 95 minimum. We have to deliver that. You see, we have to have a put. It's the only way we
can get that picture. Both of us are going to pay
for a put with your money. He thinks he's actually got
a little better Sharpe ratio. He thinks you've got
to hire him. He goes home. I stay with you and I say, let's talk some more. I say, tell me about what you really want to do
with this portfolio. I tease out of you, so I'm
actually talking about. I'm not talking
about the weather. You tell me actually, if I can get to 190, I'm done. That's my goal. Think of that again
in the tenths of a pension, 100 percent financed. Now, you would like more, but your purpose of this portfolio is you
want to get to 190. It's like if you hire
your travel agent to fly you to San Francisco, if they also give
you a free ticket to go to Dallas afterwards, if it was free,
you would take it what you really want to
get to San Francisco. If you get there
cheapest, fastest, and most comfortable,
you're happy. Do you understand?
You say that to me. Now I say to you, hire me. I'm going to do
better than he does. By the way, you don't need
to bring your consent. You don't need to
do any simulations. Let me tell you what
I'm going to do. Instead of what he and I do, this is what he does. He gets you to the floor. and gives you the upside, the best Sharpe ratios. It's all there. But of course, he has to pay for the insurance, that's hedging and
diversification of free, but insurance that you pay for, so he can't give you
the 45-degree line. He gives you displace one
because he has to use like, I do some of the money to
pay for the insurance. Instead of investing a 100, he's going to invest
95 Sharpe ratio and buy the insurance for Phi. Well, I have to buy
the insurance too. Let's just say we had
the same Sharpe ratio, in fact, the same
portfolio underneath. I have the floor. But what I do is I sell off a call with a strike
price equal to 190. Do you understand? I
just sell the call. I get paid for that,
that's insurance. How much? I've
made them the same price this picture
would be easy for you. I get $5 for 100 call, which allows me to
pay for the put. It's a different price, you should get a
different picture. You see I took in more money. Why? I gave up your upside. Well, what did I get you? I put you on the 45-degree line. Now let me summarize this. You can tell this from
this picture. You don't even have to know the
probability distribution. That's why we don't have
to do any simulation. Let's look at all the
outcomes that matter to you. I say this portfolio has a higher probability
of getting to the goal than his.
You know what? If we don't get to the goal, for every outcome, I'll have a smaller shortfall
than he does. Does that sound like
better performance? In the whole range
you care about, you've told me, I
didn't tell you. In every state, you're
better off with me than him. That's pretty good sales and I didn't need one simulation. Now I know I'm simplifying, but what does this tell you? I took the trouble to find
out what her goal was. That was the real work. I said, if you
agree to that goal, if that's what you really want, I can outperform him, not because I have a
better Sharpe ratio and I'm not faster,
quicker, smarter. What I am is, I tailored it to what you need and what I
did is get rid of payoffs that weren't
important to you to enhance the chances of getting
what is important to you. That's like preference function, but I'm using goals because
I think that's the way the real world
describes these things because it's too complex. Think of goals as
a simplification of having a whole
preference phase. That's why goal based investing
can improve performance, and I believe by the way, with all the compensation
for Sharpe ratios, I won't ask you to define, but when you get down
to two finalists, pretty hard to
tell which one has a better Sharpe ratio
I'll bet; I'm guessing. Because if you make
it to the finals, it's like who's going to win the 100-yard dash
in the Olympics. What's the difference between the first and third guy is hundredths of a
second difference, but it's pretty tough. That's goals based. Now, next thing I want to do because
I got to watch the time. MALE_1: We're fine. Robert C. Merton: What I
want to say, actually, is this is for you, this is all about long-term. I have three things I want to talk about
long-term investing, but I wanted to
point out one thing before I get to
the three things. Three is always a good number. Two is boring and
one is too singular. Now this is a case
of a pension fund, or importantly your
individual DC account, which I may be managing
for you in fact, under QDIA is always if
you're in a default, you don't know what
you want me to do, you won't even tell
me your goals. I have to make the
goal up for you. But what do I do?
What's a good goal for you? I don't even know you. How about a good retirement would be being able to
live the way that you've become accustomed to living in the latter part of
your work-life and live that way for the rest
of your life. Not too bad. Of course you'd like more, but I can promise you, you're a young group, but when you get there, you're not going to want less. Unless you're not well, and then you need a lot more money. If you accept that, I
could set a goal for you and this is what DB
plans have done. They asked with Social Security
in this, if you live off, this is for working
middle-class people. Don't do introspection. You're not working middle-class because you're in finance, which is wonderful but don't do introspection when
you're building these systems or
making judgments. What we do is we list
the balance sheet of all the retirement dedicated assets and
then the retirement liability if it were a pension
fund of a corporation, is it a real liability? But if it's your DC plan, it's still a liability
to yourself. Just because we'd go from DB to DC doesn't mean your
preferences change. Everybody seems
to like DB plans. Do you know of any employers
who have marched on their employer to get rid of
the DB plan and replace it? I know of no one in the world. You give me an
example that'll be as Paul Samuelson used to say, the exception that
proves the rule. But the point is, your tastes don't change. This doesn't matter
whether it's DB or DC. What's happening is you want to look at the assets
that are committed only that because this is only about retirement
and not your whole, and what are your liabilities? You may have a minimum and you're trying to
get to a desired, that goal of a good retirement. Now, why do I put this up there? By doing it as a
risk balance sheet, it's not just the magnitude
of these numbers, it's the risk characteristics. If I'm trying to match
your standard of living that you enjoyed in the latter part
of your work life, this is very low-risk, future contributions even though your wages may be uncertain, because it's relative value,
it's Modigliani life cycle. If your wages go down,
that's the bad news. Your standard of
living goes down but so does the amount that
you want to retire at. You don't keep the retirement at the same level. You balance it. If you're doing this
for many generations, you're balancing
the generations, you're not saying
we're going to make the third or fourth generation
from now in Norway. We have a target for
them no matter what else is happening but I thought there was the idea was to try to conceptually balance
many generations. The concept is the same
and if you have that, then actually future
contributions, you can have disability
or something, but it's actually
pretty low-risk. Why I say that without
knowing the goal, you can't possibly even
know what's risky. That's pretty dangerous. Quickly, for long-term
investing like pensions, what's the next one?
Sovereign wealth fund. Well, I suggest the
balance sheet you look at is the government and I
include the central bank with all respect because when our Fed buys from the
Treasury and back-and-forth, if you look at it
as the government, it has reason to
keep it separate, but you want enough for this. What we do is put
all the assets of the government and
they're very different for different countries. Some have very big government owned
enterprises, actually, some pretty big ones in different parts of
the world that's big. In Singapore, they don't have too much oil that I'm aware of. They have a lovely harbor. But that is part of
the balance sheet. Here's the wealth fund
and then maybe you have a specialized pension fund
which has its own goal. Over here you have all
the liabilities in order of what I
would think is there are things that
you would default on your debt before you would do it like national security.
That's all this here. We've got the base. You see, I've put
everything in there, foreign currency debt, pension liabilities, and then
all the guarantees we've written as a government. Then we have what's left. What is that? That's basically the
total value of what the government has for
society that is not committed and you can put multi-generational
liabilities up there as part of those other items. Say, we want to make sure
that the next 20 generations or as a perpetuity
we are going to pay that. You understand? In some ways, the noise is back and I'm thinking of a pension fund
because they're two very long-term investors and I think they're interesting because yours is
closer to a perpetuity because I think as I
understand your goal, whereas if I have a pension fund personal or
not, it's very lifecyclely. In other words, I keep getting closer to when I'm going to cash in and so it has the life cycle effect whereas
if it's a perpetuity, you don't. We all know that. I thought I'd choose those
and by looking at these risks,  you can first decide what should the sovereign
wealth fund do. Now you've got debt
management going on here, you've got currency reserves, you don't want to
centralize that. You let them all do
whatever they want. But somewhere in
that balance sheet, there has to be something
that thinks about the risk of this because
that's what matters. If you're doing a
bunch of other things, somebody has to
say, wait a minute, we're taking too much risk
for the whole government for the long term and
maybe we do it and that's how you can figure out maybe what the
sovereign wealth funds. The easiest example is
sovereign wealth fund is if you have a big amount of oil
on that balance sheet, you're probably not loading up with the market weight
in oil, I'm guessing. You don't have to
tell me, but I know it's on the computer. You make everything public so I'm not talking
out of school here. Well, that sounds trivial,
but think about that. You're not going to be
impressed if someone says, we have four models, here are four sovereign
[inaudible] . If you are of this
size and this shape, we put you in this bucket, you wouldn't put up with that. What you'd want to do is
go through all of this, figured out the strategy,
and then optimize. Remember where the
optimization is coming from? It's dynamic mixing
to optimize the goal, making that optimal
combination of risky assets. We're all okay? Now, let me quickly
move forward. One more, this long term, since many of us are from universities and if you
were taking Harvard or MIT, I'm being very provincial. You know that gifts and so
forth are important part of the portfolio and
I always say if MIT didn't have $1 of
its endowment in tech, it's got a big tech investment or the Harvard Business School. If you don't take
account of that, by the way, if
you're interested, someone did a back
of the envelope, and I'm pointing at him because I know he's at
Harvard Business School. I know the Beta is 0.6
on giving to the S&P. You think you have a
little exposure and try it on your publishing, which is trade books,
very sensitive. Executive education. HBS is loaded with big Beta. MALE_2: Operating leverage. Robert C. Merton: Yes,
and operating leverage. I'm not going to
go through these. I showed you is the
risk balance sheet is one way to
simplify your lives. Because if you just
do it without that and you put the
sovereign wealth fund, the thing you're managing
is the only thing, then you got all these extra hedging terms because
you're going to say, but they really have oil, so we ought to do
a term for that. It gets very disappointing. Here is a unified
way of doing it. You list everything, you may not be able to evaluate perfectly, it will be going fine.
Do you understand? Then you can use
a simpler model, a more general model, a more standard model to do the optimization once you've taken account
of all the assets. Now, of the three things I'm going to say in
my last minutes. So I'm going to talk about
the risk-free asset. This is going to
be a boring talk. It may be already, but it's
going to get more boring. What's the two things
that nobody ever wants to talk about when you're talking with professional
investors, money managers, and probably most
academics working here? The risk-free asset gets about 10 seconds
discussion, boring. The second most boring
is diversification. I mean, global diversification. I mean, the passive part. Boy, they're boring,
but I'm going to say how we can
improve performance, I think, with a few
things we can do there. Then there's one more. Now let's talk about
the risk-free asset. In my own thing when I first did the intertemporal model, I said, what's a
risk-free asset? Well, I decided to
define it technically. It was the asset that was for sure over the shortest
feasible trading interval. If trading took
place once a day, it's a one-day bill. If it takes place continuously, it's something that's t plus the t plus t_3. You understand? But it was defined technically
in a sense, it just said, by definition, it's the asset whose return over the shortest
trading interval. That's a long, much shorter than the horizon of [inaudible] bank. You see why it's technical? Now what's nice about
it, it's unambiguous. I wrote my papers and derived the demand functions in
the equilibrium with that. We got all these factors and other things that came out
in the more complex case. But everybody knew what
the risk-free asset was. I describe here what I
would call, I don't know, maybe someone has
a better name or maybe someone
already defined it, the numeraire risk-free asset. Now what's that? That's the risk-free asset, it's the lowest cost asset, so there's nothing left in it, that would pay off all the
payments in your goal. Remember, your goal, the 190. It pays all your payments. If you have many payments, it's a whole stream. All the payments in
your goal for sure. Let's define. Look at your goal, look at all the payments, and put it in as for sure. That's what I would call the numeraire risk-free
asset for you. Now, it has the feature that
if it's actually an asset, it will turn out that if
you use that numeraire, when you do your
optimization of the goal, this asset in numeraire has
a zero return and zero risk. Suppose your goal was
shares of Microsoft, not price of Microsoft, shares. Then if we measure your
numeraire shares of Microsoft, what's the change in the share of one share of
Microsoft for one share? It's one for one.
It has zero return and zero sigma.
You all know that. If you have a numeraire
which you can express as an asset price, it has zero interest rates
and it has zero return. Now that's nice because now the risk-free rate is always in your actual calculations,
a constant zero. It doesn't matter how complex the payout is in
terms of this thing, because you've defined
the risk-free assets. You don't have to make any
approximation on that side. That's a good thing to use. In fact, it's really
a good thing to use, like in a pension fund, you know what the risk-free
asset is going to look like. It's some long-dated bonds
with no payments if it's for one person or a stream of payments out to the
goal, and that's it. What is the risk-free
numeraire asset? Is it a treasury bill? No. It's a long-dated bond. The first thing you see is a
numeraire risk-free asset, and I'm just stop
calling it numeraire, the risk-free asset
depends on the goal. If you think you're not
a goal-based investor, whatever you use as
a risk-free asset is de facto your goal. If you use a 90-day
treasury bill, your goal is 90 days. Unless you use it technically. That's one reason to be interested in the
risk-free asset. It's well-defined whether
it exists or not. I may go to the
marketplace and there is no risk-free asset traded. That doesn't mean it's
not well-defined, it's just I can't buy
it. I'll deal with that. Next thing is, and
that's where I say, if it's not available we create a surrogate
risk-free asset. I define that for you
before we leave, I hope. I'm getting 10 minutes. It's going to be a
fast one, but that's okay. I've done it. You're smart group.
You're better than my students. Much better. They're good, as
you know, because many of you are
teaching the same ones. I can do this. The point here
is, let me just finish it. The risk-free asset is
dependent on the goal. Every one of you, Your numeraire risk-free asset
in this room is different. If you're retiring
on a different day or your a different gender, you have a different
risk-free asset. Why? Because your
life expectancy depends on your
gender, for example. There's zillions of
risk-free assets out there, but they're all well-defined and they're relevant
to use with your goal because they have this
nice feature that you know exactly what the risk-free asset is and you get all
that cleaned out. You don't have to do all that adjusting that my model did, that I used the wrong
risk-free asset, because your horizon is nothing like the shortest
trading interval. You see what it does,
it simplifies it. Now you know what's risk-free. Why is that important? What's risk? Risk is
equivalent to non-linear. It's only defined as a complement
to a well-defined set. The risk-free asset
is well-defined. Risky is everything
that's not risk-free. Linear is well-defined, non-linear is
everything that's not. There is no general theory
of non-linear equations, and there's no
general risky asset. Risky asset is only defined
by the risk-free asset. That's why it's important, even if you don't invest in it, you got to know what's risky. Let me just jump ahead
because of this, to a couple of pictures that some have seen in
a different context. I took here a typical 45-year-old who's
going to retire at 65, and asked what is his risk-free
or her risk-free asset. Well, I'm not talking
about buying the annuity. What I do is I do a
traded portfolio. This happens to be in tips, so it's inflation protected. I do a dynamics trading, and this has been
done for 30 years, so this is pretty standard. Do dynamic trading and tips to replicate the risk
of the annuity, because we don't want
to buy the annuity, because you don't want
to give all your money away if something happens
to you when you're 42. What we want is hedge the
price you pay for the annuity. I'll hedge that, which has nothing to do with your individual
health or anything, only your age characteristics, because what the insurance
company will pay for it. But then when you retire, you actually get
the annuity because now you care how long you live rather than how long the average
lives. You understand? This is a hedge
portfolio, actually, run from 2003 to April 2012. Those are the monthly
returns measured by NAV. Does that look like a
risk-free asset to any of you? I doubt it. It's as volatile
almost as a stock market. That's the monthly returns. What's the problem? I showed you the returns
in the wrong metric, the wrong numeraire. This is dollars. That's like your risk-free asset was overnight treasury bill, or monthly treasury bill. Of course, it looks terrible. When I measure it in
the right income units starting in 20 years, which is your risk-free asset, of course, if I
did it perfectly, you get zero zero. No risk. Do those look
approximately the same? How many people would you look at the
real-world investing, either for DC or even for
DB, but especially DC? How many people realize
that as part of regulation, Department of Labor and SEC, we have to send the NAV to
all the DC participants? This is what they see, and this is what they
learn is risk for them. Now, here's the flip side. What's the gold
standard for principal? Treasury bill. This is 90-days treasury bills real
returns over this period. No vol, low return. This is what happens if you put treasury bill in a
retirement account. You look at it and
you think this area, it's one of the riskiest
asset on the planet. I don't need to show
you that since we swing short rates go from four or five percent CDs 12 years
ago to 10 basis points. That's a 50-fold decline. Huge vol. Why is that important? Because regulation makes me
send that to every member. I'm teaching every member that risk that matters is the NAV. I tell you what the
perverse thing of this is, because of shortness of time. Because of that, you have these things called
target date funds which are allowed not to be sued their recognition for DC
plans, they have one feature. They put you more and more in fixed income as you get older. That's the requirement. It's
supposed to make you safer. Here's what actually happens
in the real-world because of this one way of looking
and measuring the wrong way. What happens is I
have a 62-year-old. They've made it. I put
them 100 percent hedged. This if interest rates back up 100 basis points, he's going to see
or she's going to be 15 percent decline. At 62 they're going
to be on the phone to the HR department saying,
what is going on? You've lost 15 percent
of my retirement income. I want to find out who did this. I'm going to sue you
and then shoot you. Sue first, shoot second, and then they get
all their friends because since it's
the interest rate, everybody has got
the same impact. You put them in
the safest asset. The phone's ringing off the
hook at the HR department, they call you and say, what are you doing? I don't want to
have our employee. You know what they
ended up doing? Go and look at the data. They put them in
three-year notes. Why? Because now you don't get the
volatility and the NAV, you get this versus that. I'm trying to show you these
are not trivial effects. This is not just
measurement error. By choosing the wrong risk-free asset and writing regulations of what risk is because
you've measured it wrong, you're actually making everybody systematically because
these are QDIA, these are 90 something
percent of I believe the DC money of this goes into these
things because they're QDIA. You take  whole
generations of people and you're putting them
in riskier and riskier positions. You want
to see how risky? Take a look at the difference. This is the standard risk return points, treasury bills. This crummy high vol, low return on asset that you saw there, and there's equities. Here's what it is when
you measure it in terms of the relevant
risk-free asset. It's as though T-bills have as much vol of us as
the stock market, and they have negative
returns to boot. That's about as band and
asset as you can buy. I know this isn't high science. I'm trying to show you that these things that
we're talking about, measuring it wrong, the
risk-free [inaudible] wrong isn't just
measurement error. When we make it raw, I can't even not
show this to you. You know how people learn.
They learn by doing. Well, surrogate risk-free asset. All I've mentioned there
because of the time is don't let anyone tell you because there isn't an
actual risk-free asset out there perfectly to
hedge that therefore, might as well hold timber or
stocks or something else. The right risk-free
asset is you create a surrogate risk-free
asset. What's that? That's the asset that
comes close to tracking the true risk-free
asset if it were their minimum tracking error. That's your criteria, and that's your surrogate. I guarantee you
that it will not be timber and it won't be stocks, and it won't be commodities. It will probably be things like tips in different countries. But other things like that, it's not going to be those
with very high probability. But whatever it is,
you have a rule here. First, you find the
portfolio that has the highest [inaudible] tracking
error to what you want. Secondly, because it
has tracking error, you have to put a reserve on it because you want to treat
it as a risk-free asset. When you had hedge, you can't do anything more all you can do is
put a reserve up. What you do is if I've
got tracking error, it looks like that curve. Instead of pricing the
asset at the market, I price it at enough
reserve so there's a 98 percent chance
I'll be able to pay. That means I have to
create a reserve. That means if I'm pricing
the risk-free asset, If I have a 10 percent reserve, then I divide the price by
1.1 because you convert it. The beauty of this
is this automatic. When you have low
tracking error, you have a low reserve. You got to say, then you get credit
for better tracking. For a 62-year-old, we can
hedge that very well. For 28-year-old. But that's what you want. Don't let people do that. Well, I know I've
run out of time. Sorry about that, gentlemen. I had two more, but. MALE_3: Don't worry. Keep up. Robert C. Merton: You
can all leave though. I mean, except the bus probably
won't leave without me. Let me tell you another
one because this is real-world today, right now. I mean, others too. This is happening
in the DC system. I mean, this is
really happening. This is situation
about diversification, the second most boring
after the risk-free asset, and we're going to
talk about China here, and as you're well aware, China has always had some degree of capital
controls; it's not free. Chinese nationals can't buy
assets out of the country. There's allocations, and after the 2015 decline in the market, after a big rise, they responded by a lot of things because, as they say, stability is more
important than growth, and they felt they
were just worried, so they shut down
their futures markets. They put all restrictions on and largely got into
capital controls more than they even were before. Now, I'm not to talk to you
about capital controls. That's outside of my pay grade. But what do capital
controls do with finance? Well, I wanted to show you
a fast picture here that people can understand who
are not finance experts, but are people
making decisions on policy at the highest levels. First, you want to show what is the cost of capital controls? From a finance point of view,
leave aside anything out. What I did is we know that the world portfolio is
at least theoretically, I did this with MSCI World. Don't take the numbers literally because I'm
illustrating a process. That's what my sister holds. My sister is very smart
and very talented. She doesn't know
anything about finance, so she just holds it in
a passive portfolio. That's the ex post risk return
of my sister's portfolio, who knows nothing about finance. Here's the return you would have gotten if you invested in China ex-post that period. You see the Sharpe
ratio is a bit lower. Now it's not fair
to compare those two because random draw, this is after the fact. What I did is a simple thing. I created an ex ante estimate conditional on what
happened to the world. Which is essentially if
China had been 0 Beta, neither over-performed
or underperformed, what would you have
forecast? That's this line. That's close to, it's
not the most optimal, but it's easy to understand. That is the cost of
not diversifying, but just holding China. Now I'm so glad you let
me do this because I have a vested interest
in the next slide, I'm looking at the two of you. You see, first of all, this
establishes a problem. I mean, I'll tell you where
you are on the frontier. If you did a rough estimate
with these numbers for China, all the things,
it probably costs China 300 basis points a year. Now the rule of 72,300 basis points doubles your
money in 24 years, which is about one
generation or little less. The way you might frame
it to the people, a cost not saying
you shouldn't do it. You would have twice as much money in your pension fund in one generation if you
didn't have this drag, that's a big number for
1.3 billion people. That gets attention that
this is not a small cost, which a lot of times
people think adds a few basis points or something.
That's the first thing. But if you just show
people a problem, you've got a problem
and leave the room. I always tell my students that's a bad strategy with your boss. First, your boss probably
knows that the problem's there,  and you seem to be
telling the boss you should fix it. You always want
to have a solution. Here's the solution from
financial innovation. What we're going to
do is right now, I'm assuming it's
complete capital controls and then you can
adjust it for how much. All the a shares, all of this just do it stocks. All the a shares
are held in China. They have to be if you had
full capital controls, and so they're all held in Sovereign Wealth
Funds, pension funds, CIC wherever they are, even though CICs
[inaudible] but they do. The return to those funds is the return on China a shares. Now what if they entered
into a total returns swap with and I'm going
to tell you who with, a total return swap where they pay the return on
a shares and receive world. What do they have? They
still are holding all the shares, their voting
all the shares. The governance is all in China. You don't have
to worry about that. All the investment
is inside China. It meets government investment. All those policies that you hear are reasons to have
capital controls. But now you're getting
World portfolio in China. Pretty cool. We've picked
up 300 basis points. But what about capital controls? Is there a problem with
capital control? Answer is no. This is better than
capital controls. It's not only not violated
capital controls, it's better than
capital controls. Why? Let me show you. Well, before that,
answer the question. You all are saying the
total return swap. If they don't do the swap, they just keep
everything in China, they get the lower return
by 300 basis points, and what's the risks they got? It's China risk, same thing. Inefficient. If they do this, we know they're getting the
300 basis points, ex ante. That's good. What about
for capital controls? But first of all, there's
no money that flows. These swaps are exchange of risks on the same notional
amount. There's no money. When you buy the swap, no money goes out of
the country you're in, but then you have
to settle the swap. Say you're suddenly it every
six months or ever year. First of all, you know when
the money is going in or out, you know the exact date. It's not like a big shock where people are pulling
their money out. It either goes out, whether times are good
or bad on a given date. But the most important thing is, what are the flows? When does China pay money out? That's what you're worried.
With capital controls, you worried about
money going out. Only when the
Chinese stock market outperforms the
world's stock market. Are those tough times for China? No. That's a good
time to be paying. You don't need capital
controls when you are outperforming the rest of the
world. It'd be very rare. But what happens when you under-perform? When
times are tough? Maybe none of your fault. Money actually flows in. It's actually more stable than the capital patrols
when nothing happens, you get a higher ex-ante return, and you can make the
case common sense. This doesn't require
a lot of econometrics to show them that it's
actually stabilizing. The flows are controlled
because you know what day and you know
what amounts contingent. You don't know how
much. But let's say Chinese market craters, which way does the payment go? Let me just quickly
on this point out. That sounds nice in theory. But the first question I got was when I showed this elsewhere, wonderful professor, where if we took all the a shares are
big chunk of a shares, and we did this swap. Who in the heck is going
to be the counterparty? We're going to have to pay
through the nose to do this? What's the first thing I say? I know where your
counter-parties are. What do we know? The best
diversified portfolio is the World portfolio. If China is
overweighted in China, what's true about the
rest of the world? It has to be underweighted. Means there's demand
there for China. I'm not talking about
information trading. I'm talking about
structured risks that you hold all the time. I'm not talking about playing
market timing or anything. I'm talking about core holdings, a big core holdings of big
long-term institutions. Something like the
market portfolio. If you can't get Chinese
A-shares you would like them. What do we say? I
know where to go. I'm a teacher, I'm
not a market here. I know where I'm going to go. I'm going to come to
you and say, I bet you, you either have very
expensive ways of getting the A-shares or you don't
have enough of them, especially if it was
full capital controls, you wouldn't have
any of them really. You want them. Now,
the next question is, what do we do about
implementation? Can Goldman Sachs
do these tens of billions or hundreds of billions of market exposures swaps. What if it's Deutsche Bank? My god, credit risk. I say you do not
need Goldman Sachs. You don't need Deutsche Bank. This is a swap of
traded securities. The pricing of that swap, you could get a
first year MBA to do or more prudently and I'm not going to
put a plug for him. What you may know, Gifford Fong from
MIT. Gifford Fong for decades has had a firm
that does risks manually. He'd hire something like
Gifford Fong; I'm not pushing. Say we'll agree
that Gifford Fong will compute the swap price. Very capable of doing that. The counter parties will
agree Gifford Fong doesn't have and we pay him X dollars
a month to do this or whatever. Pricing a swap on traded securities is
not rocket science. You don't need Goldman
Sachs or people get paid millions of dollars a
year to figure out that. What about the transaction? I would guess, I don't travel,
I'm not in the meetings, but I could name about 30 or 40 institutions in the world, sovereign wealth
funds, reserve funds, even without going into
private sector at all. Well, you all know each other? You all know your credit. You all understand
this is not a trade. You all need the risk sharing. Why do you want to waste
any money on that? Why do you want to
have any credit risk? Just do it with each other. By the way, swap contracts had been used for
decades, including, I would suspect most of the sovereign funds and others have used swaps
from time to time. That contract legally has
been already adjudicated. It's not like you got
to wait 10 years to see if those things have
been forgotten. These contracts that
are out there, you see. Go through it. Now
I've really run over, but if you'd go through
it each of these things first of all I showed you
was the right way contract. That's jargon meaning
you pay when you do well and you get paid
when you do poorly. In the real world markets, the same contract will trade at a different price if it's
right way or wrong way. Meaning, if I have to
pay when I'm down, which is typical if I borrow
in a foreign currency versus a debt versus
a right way contract, the prices are different for a good reason because the risk. Already. Half the
time you owe money, which means half the time you're not even extending credit. On top of that, you're doing
it with counterparties. We're the best counterparties
in the world and you've eliminated all
the transaction costs. By the way, you have a steady supply on both sides because both of you always will
have that need, all of you. By the way, if China
wants to bring some of this diversified
stuff into China for distribution to people
individually, like in funds. Then whoever your
counterparties are can then sell it through contracts
with internally. If it's with CIC or reserves or whoever they could
do the contracts. They would sell off
their risk of World. They would sell that off, let's say to local
institutions who can then get distributed if
you wanted to do it. Now I'm taking you through
these nuts and bolts. Because what I want to
see is where I think is a very strong feature of
innovation when it's done well. Unlike an original piece of research that has to be
some clever new tool. If this is a solution
that hasn't been done and it hasn't and you
have a big solution, then you love it
because you're using tools that everybody knows
that had been adjudicated, have been used enormous scale
that the legals are there. You can point out
how you can do it at virtually no transaction
or credit cost. In both, there are also swaps are unlike a lot of
things are reversible. If you change your mind, you can do a swap the other way, you're out, and you don't
change anything around. I've gone on about
as much as I can. There was a third one, but I'll leave that for another night. It's called Financial
Service Alpha. All that saying is, I would say, since we've mentioned
corporate finance today, I want to give. There are parts of
your portfolio. I'm looking at you but
because I don't see anybody in pension funds
but you particularly. That's the price of
coming to dinner. MALE_4: Special dispensation.
You got five more minutes. Do this last thing
and we end there. Robert C. Merton: You all
got it. The only thing I wanted to say was that you can do
financial services. By that I mean, I
believe, actually as an aside that most hedge fund returns
and I believe this one, I had a hedge fund and I
told investors at the time. It's not a new theory
of the week that most hedge fund
returns come from financial services not being
faster, quicker, smarter. We don't have to agree with me. But I'm saying a
lot of the return, they're really
financial institutions meaning they provide financial
services in the market. But instead of steady fees, they earn a spread like a market maker because they do it through the capital markets. They register as an Alpha. There's nothing wrong with that. I'm just saying it's a
true Alpha is just not an Alpha from being
faster, quicker, smarter. The advantage of that is you can do it much bigger scale than information trading
because it isn't an information trade and you have a comparative
advantage. The way you what to think
of financial Alpha is more like corporate finance
because what do we know? Having an Alpha is
the same as having a positive net present
value project. Discount the cash,
expected cash flow with the cost of capital. That's the same statement. We normally investing
talk about Alpha. But in this case, I would
suggest for financial health, you may want to think of it, you want like financial service. We're providing
financial services. We get compensated
for doing that. We are the best ones to do it because we have the attributes. A sovereign wealth fund, like a hedge fund is not
regulated very heavily. You don't have
capital requirements, you don't have all
these other things. You don't pay taxes, you don't have
liquidity demands. You're the ideal
counterparty for financial services to
institutions like banks, insurance companies,
even pension funds who do have those rigidities. Even within your own, I'm using you
because you're here, but within your own groups you have the current life
cycle generation. That's all the people
who are alive now. They may be very little, but if they were
thinking about it, they see the end for themselves. They are thinking in terms
of the you've got this goal and you want to get
there for you 50 years. But when you get to retirement, that will be the thing. That's life cycle. You're not really thinking
life cycle because you have all of those
generations, it never ends. What can you do that they can't? The people that are not yet born that you're worrying about can't trade themselves with their
life cycle people here. What you can do is create
bonds and give her, or give me to do for her the bonds and she needs to
hedge her risk-free asset. But you're doing this
all on your portfolio because you're doing
it for everybody. She's in your portfolio. Where do you get the
funding for that? You get the funding from that from the generations
in the future. What do you give them in return? They're writing insurance, they're writing this free asset. They're going to get
the returns because she's capped;
remember that goal? You're doing an
inter-generational risk transfer and you have a way of
thinking about that. It's not just doing it. That's a financial service. I think it's these numbers
can be quite large, but you should think of it as a business because
it's more like it's a positive net present
value because you have a comparative
advantage over others. That's the way to
think about it. That's my third one. I think, we'll quit on that. Oh, one other thing is we're walking out of the room I know. I just recently sent
out an innovation we're pushing which
is called SeLFIES. I never made up the
name on my own. My co-author. He's very good at titles. But what it is, it's a bond that doesn't pay
anything for some number of years and then pays a level stream but
no balloon payments. It's like a deferred annuity, but without the longevity. That's the perfect
thing when this 45-year old's not going
to retire, so 65. They don't need any
payments before then. You give them a 0, but then they want something that's
a stream of payments, that's a standard of living. They don't want the balloon. But we want it not
indexed to inflation, which is a good idea. We want to index it to
per capita consumption. That if you think about it, is even probably a better hedge. Why? Because it not only hedges your inflation, it hedges
standard of living. If you're going to
live a long time in retirement and I worked, would you really want to be
using the televisions and the computers that you got when you retired
at 65, when you're 80? Probably not. If you believe in relative
utility and how I feel is relative
to how everybody else is then that's another
way of thinking of it. The beauty of it is if a
government does that either with a sovereign
wealth fund backing each other or does it directly, it has the perfect hedge, a VAT. It's easier to hedge
per capita consumption. It is the hedge inflation because you've got a
big revenue source, which is by definition, if it's working, consumption. In an economy where you
don't trust the accounting, you could actually work out
and take the VAT revenues, which at least are real numbers, and divide it by the tax
rate; that will give you consumption and
divide by the population. This is a really, it turns out, the government
is a perfect case for this. That's the bonds you want
to do because you're trying to equate standard
livings. I believe. Your trade standard living
as a measure by aggregate, not GDP, that's different. It's just like for
inflation, you don't care about GDP inflation, you care about inflation for
your consumption goods if you're a consumer and
you're not working anymore. That I will quit on. But I think I got
everything out there. If you didn't get it the
first time I hear a song, I like, if I don't like
the song, why do I care? The first time I hear someone I like she's saying, she's going. I don't know one
word she's saying. I like the song. What do I do? I listened to it 20 times, 30 times; guess what? At the end of the 30th time, I know every word. If you didn't get all the lyrics tonight after
dinner on the wine, after a long day, I hope you at least
got the melody. Finance science,
finance innovation. Go back and look at things
that we take for granted. It's not thinking
out of the box. It's actually using the
foundational principles. It's nothing here that
is radical, different. But it's enormously different from the way things are done. You can have big impacts, order magnitude
impacts on events, not adding an extra factor, which is nothing
wrong with that. You get paid for it and then it helps efficiency. I'm talking about
very big issues, like the ones I hope you can see and are being
addressed here. 