John Cochrane: Thank
you for inviting me and thank you all for listening. This is a keynote, so I get to speculate rather
than do serious work. This effort, as usual for me, ran completely too long. I'll advertise that there's a
paper version on my website that does much more than
I'm going to do today. I want to take the chance to, when I was so kindly invited, there was a title about long-term investors and
what they should do. I want to try to think
about what should we do for the supposed topic
of this conference. How should long-term
investors do what they do in dynamic markets? Now, from an academic point of view this almost seems
like a soft problem. Martin gave us the
answer 52 years ago. You split between the
market risk-free rate and state variable hedging
portfolios. We have a dubious view of active
management and its fees. Indeed, portfolio theory seems
like such a soft problem. It's almost a backwater, sorry, John and Buoys. Despite your wonderful work
here we are at the NBER, the number 1 place
to do conferences, having a conference
on asset management, and I count at best one paper in our whole course
that has anything to say about portfolio theory
and asset management. Every model has been about the representative investor and why as the price has changed, but not what portfolio changes. Which is not criticism. These
have been great papers. They're just seems like portfolio theories
are backwater, because we have nothing
to say about it. Now, I want to argue no, I want to say this is something vital and there's plenty to do. That's, suppose this
is a cheering talk. One way to see why I think
there's something to do, let's compare theory
and practice. We've had next to zero
impact on the world. As you know, portfolio theory doesn't well describe
what individuals do. Institutions are fun because
we can see their process and we know; they tell
us how they do stuff. The way they do stuff has nothing to do with what
we tell them to do. Look at our endowments, they've put buckets by category, stocks,
bonds, alternatives. They then rebalance
very frequently. They seem to love
illiquid stuff. They seem to love paying
fees on top of fees. One of our colleagues
added up at Stanford paid $800 million in fees last year. Then every now and
then our websites, I remember the University of
Chicago endowment websites, that they were the
long-term investor who could wait out temporary
market dislocations, 2008 came and they sold everything in a panic
and froze hiring, which is happening
again this year. As far as state variable's
silence. It's interesting. Most university endowments hire some very high-priced advice, us to teach their students and their endowments don't
want to talk to us. I think they know the answers we tell them and they
don't want to hear it. Theory is very different
from practice. What do you do when theory is totally different
from practice? Well, there's the
Chicago approach, or at least the traditional one, which is, well, let's go find the question to
which what they're doing is the optimal answer. There's the Cambridge approach. I'm trying to keep
this light, which is, let's go, let's tell these morons that they should
be doing things better. I'm going to take a
Cleveland approach. I don't want to call it
a Stanford approach. It's halfway between the two. Certainly there is something on both sides we can
bring to practice. A lot of what I'm going
to talk about is how to market portfolio theory,
not how to do it. But clearly we could bring what
we do to practice better. While we're doing it,
let's listen, and in fact, many of the things that
seem to us irrational may tell us something
about the problem they want to solve that we're
not doing a good job on. Because we need to
think better about how to implement a portfolio
theory and how to market it. There's a fact that
the expected returns and betas and so forth, if you try to do that out of anything but a toy
model, it just blows up. How to do it, the
theory is clear, but bringing it to work, you've seen what John and Luis have done and how hard it was just to solve
that Martin problem. I'll emphasize two
big ideas here. First, I think we will not necessarily
do portfolio theory, but we'll sell it better if
we focus on the payoffs, the dividend streams,
not one period returns. That's idea 1. Idea 2 is actually bringing general equilibrium theory to the problem will help a lot. I think that our clients, investors should think about who they are and
what the market is, and that will help them
to make a good decision. There's all sorts of stuff we've learned about
asset markets. As for example, this
morning, since 1970. We can bring portfolio
theory to that, we just have to complete the models and add
some heterogeneity and every paper has a portfolio
theory corollary. Let's talk about the
payoff perspective. I was absolutely
stunned when in 2001, John Campbell came
to Chicago and gave a John and Luis' classic
paper on long-term bonds. The proof that the
index perpetuity is the riskless asset for
the long-term investor. Now, my reaction to that was,
well, duh, that's obvious. Then my second reaction
to it was, wait a minute, I didn't know that
three minutes ago and nobody in this room knew
that three minutes ago. That's the sign of a
really brilliant paper. Congratulations, both of you. Then I'll admit to a
twinge of jealousy. Why didn't I think of that, because it's now so clear. But what makes that clear is when you look
at it by the payoffs. If you say an index perpetuity is a coupon that
goes on forever, a real coupon, then
it's obvious that's the riskless asset for a
long-term investor. If you look at it, the conventional
way of looking at it, that yields on long-term
bonds or a state variable for their investment
opportunity set and there's some partial derivatives of a value function out
there and so forth, now it's not so obvious at all, which is why John and
Luis had to write a paper and not just state
an obvious fact. Knowing that there's
a deep insight in there which has led me
to think we should be at least communicating and
matching to investors based on the final stream as opposed to thinking in terms of hedging state variable
risk and so forth, an idea that they
do not seem to get. Let me put it this way. Suppose, let's sit down for a retirement portfolio
planning with your spouse, who we'll imagine is a
infinitely risk averse investor. Let's discuss what you're
going to do, and of course, you're going to start with an indexed perpetuity
because that's the risk-free asset and then you're going
to build on that. A month goes by and the
statement comes in, and it's gone down 20 percent. Your spouse comes in saying, "What the hell happened here? Mister or Miss brilliant
finance professor, you just lost 20 percent
of our retirement savings on your risk-free asset.
What's going on?" How do we have this discussion? Well, you can start with, well, honey state variables for time-varying investment
opportunities in the partial derivative of the
value function, so forth. That conversation is not
going to go very well. It's going to lead to,
and isn't that what you said when you shorted
Tesla last month? How about a conversation
that goes, honey, look, let's talk
about the payoffs. This is an index perpetuity, it'll pay us a coupon forever. It doesn't matter
what the prices are. We're not planning to
sell these things, or buy more of these things. We're just going to
live off the coupons. Would you start tearing up the statements and not
letting them worry you. That I think is a
good way to have this conversation with
a long-term investor. Similarly, stocks, it turns
out are a lot like bonds, that's another fact
that we learned. [inaudible] dividends are
a sign of low returns. Stocks are, as John and Luis
and others have taught us a great hedge for their
own investment risk. How can we sell that
idea to our spouse, that we should be
investing more in stocks as well as
the long-term bond. Well, we could start in
with this discussion about hedges for
intertemporal opportunities. If the price is low, it's going to bounce back. We know that from some
regressions and so forth. We have the same
hard discussion. Why don't we just say, look, we're going to buy these
stocks for the dividends. Dividends are much more
stable than prices are. Let's just ignore the prices and buy these stocks
for the dividends. In fact, dividends are salient in a way that
market prices aren't. We all understand the dividends are connected to the economy, so you're taking on a risk, but it's the risk of
long-term economic growth. We don't have to really think about where the
prices are going. Now, technically another
way of putting this is we all know that
the dividend yields, forecasting returns is the
flip side of dividends yields don't forecast
dividend growth. I think that flip side is an
easier one to communicate. Here's a graph from
a Bob Shiller, and by the way, we don't have to talk about, another way of saying
it is beggars are all our discount rate beta. We don't have to talk about
behavioral irrationally here.  It's just the fact
that most price variation comes from expected
returns and does not come from
dividend variation. Somewhere there's a
quote by Bob Shiller. Remember the quote,
not the source, but when someone asked, why should you buy
stock, he said, buy stocks for the dividends. This is his famous graph
from his Nobel Prize speech. These are the ex-post
dividends and the stock price. That visually shows you that the stream of dividends that you can get from a
stock investment is in fact, if you're willing to wait
for the long stream, is much safer than
the actual price. In some sense, we might just
define a long run investor as someone who wants
to eat the dividends. In this view, lots of supposed
fallacies make sense, if you take a bite for
the dividends of view. My mom, I used to try to
help her with planning. She didn't have much money, but she had to live off of it, and she would always
complain, well, honey, they're not paying
dividends anymore. How am I going to live? We've talked about
this every year. You don't have to worry
about the dividends. You're allowed to sell
stocks in the New World. Well, actually, if you're
a long-run investor, just living off the dividends
isn't a bad strategy. Our index perpetuity investor, if they saw prices
going up and sold, would be in a mess of trouble. Similarly, what I
said, prices are high, my mom would say, "Those
are just paper profits. They don't mean anything,"
and I would say, "Mom, money is money." That's an old thing.
Well, no, mom was right. That's another way of
digesting the proposition that stocks are less risky
for long-term investors because the price
volatility goes away. It makes sense of why
do our endowments love to have these
liquid assets? One, there's lots of
reasons for them. But one is you don't have
to mark them to market. It's a device for
doing what I advised. Just tear up the statements and don't pay any attention to it. Now, in thinking
about the theory, we need to remember that portfolio theory is
also a payout theory. The Merton theory doesn't just say here's the stocks
you should hold. It also says how should you eat. When we look at
the world, people, even finance professors, pay attention to the
portfolio advice and pay no attention to the
payout part of it. In the classic
portfolio theory in 1952 [inaudible] what's told us, the classic one and Merton
in the IID case said, consume proportional to wealth. People don't do that. Wealth
varies 20 percent a year. Consumption varies
one percent a year. People aren't
following that advice. People actually turns out are following some Merton advice. If you think that
price variation is transitory and does not fund a long-term consumption stream. That's in fact how, there's a lot of low-hanging
fruit in finance. We missed the equity premium
for something like 20 years because we looked at portfolio theory and didn't
look at the consumption. Equity premium
puzzle is all about the consumption is much
more stable than portfolio. Institutions are on the
other end of this thing. Now, institutions do follow consumption is
proportional to wealth. They pay out 5 percent
no matter what. But of course, Merton
payout theory says marginal utility of consumption should be proportional
to the value with, which depends on the
state variables. In fact, when the state
variables are high or low, you should have a state
dependent pay [inaudible] in most cases; that depends
on parameterizations. This all led me to think about, let's think about prices
and payout streams. That may help us to communicate
to investors who we are not communicating to if we
talk about hedge portfolios. I tried to generalize
John and Luis' paper. The risk-free asset is
the index perpetuity. Therefore, what's
the risky asset? It must be the aggregate
consumption claim. In fact, if we want
it, let's think about portfolio theory as I've written down in the
first equation here. Let's just think about
the stream of date and state contingent
consumptions. We know complete markets
portfolio theory that leads to a very
easy portfolio theory. One period, portfolio theory works perfectly in
complete markets, no matter how state dependent in multifactor and so
forth, the world is. I've tried to extend this
to incomplete markets. I wrote down the problem here. We've got a set of X is now
a set of dividends streams. You can put those together. Let's think about the time and state-dependent dividend
streams that you want to buy. Again, we can do dynamics, the Stochastic portfolio theory, just in one period
Markowitz thinking, if we treat date and
state symmetrically, and there's a two-fund theorem. Importantly to what I'm
going to talk about next, you can hedge your
outside income easily. What matters is cash flow betas. You put on, all this
price variation, you put on the back-burner. Now, it's not quite that easy because of course
there is dynamic trading. An investment firm can
create dividends for you, biodynamic trading
and payout strategy. But I think that's an
advantage, not a disadvantage. There ought to be
a good separation here of the mechanics of creating portfolios
and then trying to match them to the
institution or individual. We can choose among
dynamic strategies, but characterize them
by what's the set of the risk and the level of the payouts
that you can get. Let me give you my
second bigger idea for today, general equilibrium. I think we should, first, I'm going to
try it in English. English versus finance
is a good thing to do. Researchers,
investors, advisors, we should all routinely state, and think about a view of
the economic function of financial markets,
your place in it. Why you should get a reward? What justifies doing something different from everybody else? In our language, we
should all think in terms of a general
equilibrium with defined heterogeneity when
we do portfolio advice, might ask why in the
world would you, you are trying to
simplify things, and you're going to
complicate it all up with general
equilibrium? Yes. When you buy tomatoes down
at the grocery store, you don't need to think
about general equilibrium. You just need to know
what's the price of tomatoes and how
hungry am I today? That's the way Merton
portfolio theory works. The problem is, we
don't see the prices, the expected returns,
the covariance matrix that are in
the portfolio theory. We have actually very poor ideas of what those prices are. If you have an idea of the general equilibrium
that can cut through, I think a lot of
this uncertainty about what the prices are
and your preferences are. If you go down to the
grocery store, it says, suppose they didn't tell
you the price of tomatoes, and you have to wait
20 years to find out what did I pay
for those tomatoes? Well, if you have
an announcement of general equilibrium
that it's August and tomatoes are harvested
in August and the prices are low, that's
a good time to buy. Then you know, well, let's go buy tomatoes in August. I'm going to do two things
with general equilibrium. First, I think it
provides a good set of heuristics for portfolio
decisions and for our advice, and the most important one is that of the average
investor theorem. The average investor must hold the market portfolio. You say. But in fact, that's a very
deep theorem which causes a lot of people to
look like a deer in the headlights when they're
thinking about portfolios. Of course, that means that any deviation is
a zero-sum game, at least in a financial one. Now, maybe not a
marginal utility one. That's got to get the
marginal utility, you can give them financial, but for anybody who makes Alpha, someone else has
got to lose Alpha. When we're talking to, if someday the endowments
would let us talk to them, that might be a place to start. Because it shows you
something immediately clear. Sigma inverse Mu doesn't work, but you know something
immediately; if you're not identifiably
different from average, you should be holding
the market index. In fact, you should
not even rebalance. Now number one, portfolio
advice you always hear, so we need to rebalance 60/40, we need to rebalance, well, the average investor
can't rebalance. Stocks go up to 80/20, someone's gotta hold the 80/20. Rebalancing is a dynamic
trading strategy that is a net-zero Alpha. Somebody's gaining,
somebody who's losing. Sigma inverse Mu
is hopeless; now, here teaching MBAs
did me a lot of good because for 20 years I
tried to come up with a reasonable portfolio
maximization problem set and I could never do it and
no matter how hard I tried. Those of you who
have taught MBAs or tried to do it know this, it just doesn't work. It's just so unstable. For that reason this is a very useful piece of portfolio advice rather
than Sigma inverse Mu, which will send you
over to nowhere. Well, if you're not, how are
you different from average? That really gets you somewhere. Now, of course, there's
an answer to that. Everybody thinks that they're
smarter than average. The children of
Garrison Keillor's famous Lake Wobegon who
were all above average. But of course, we know that half of the people
who think they're above smarter than average
are deluded about that fact. I wanted to try to put this in some aphorisms that we
could bring to investors. The placebo test is one. If we talked to a
portfolio advisor or do a portfolio
maximization program, there must be a
question to which the answer is hold
the market index. Most of the time there isn't Sigma inverse
Mu trying to get the market index
out Sigma versus Mu is really hard to do. It fails the placebo test
and most portfolio advice, when you say okay, you telling me I should invest in a covered
interest arbitrage, who should be shorting it? They look at you,
well, everybody should be doing
this. It's great. Well, that's not
portfolio theory. Now we're back in
the all children are better than average test. The who should sell test
is a good one another. I'm just thinking of other
ways to say the same thing. If you go into a value manager says look value all
the great Alpha, you say, well, who should be shorting this? Who walks into your
office and you say, you should be shorting
Alpha. The answer is nobody. Well, that now we've got a big question to ask about just where's this
advice coming from? I like to call it the
look in the mirror test. Are you sure you're not the
one who should be selling? We could call it the
dinner with lions test. The motto is if you're
having dinner with lions, make sure you're at the
table not on the menu. Or the look around the table
test. If you go play poker, somebody at this
table is the mark. Make sure that's not you. Well, I'm going to apply
some of those in a minute. For us, we need to remember now as academics, I think this helps us too, portfolio theory has to be
all about heterogeneity. We have to state who should be buying and who
should be selling. There is no portfolio theory
for the average investor. The average investor holds
the market portfolio. When we do our models, we need to think what are the dimensions of
heterogeneity and always have a reasonable person is
going to be selling for everyone who thinks
we should be buying. Having given some aphorisms, let me proceed to what we could
actually do as academics. How do we incorporate the 50 years of wonderful things we've learned about the world of [inaudible]? Remember 1970, it's amazingly prescient
of Merten to even talk about state
variables because everyone thought
returns were IID. What are the state
variables anyway? What we've learned that, there are a lot of state
variables and there's multiple factors and there's anomalies and there's all
sorts of interesting stuff, but we haven't really
incorporated any of that in portfolio theory because
everything we've done, what's the portfolio theory
in everything we've done? Hold the market portfolio. We look at
representative investors who hold the market
portfolio and think about how to prices adjust so that nobody
does anything. Now that we've learned all
that stuff about markets, maybe we need to open it up. In a sense, Lucas won. Lucas' brilliant idea, you don't need to do
portfolio theory, we took that too seriously. In the good old days, there was portfolio theory and
then equilibrium, and so the ICAPM came with
modern portfolio theory. Once Lucas came
along, we stopped doing the portfolio
theory and just read things off of the
representative investor. Maybe we need to go back
and think about that. I'm just going to take a
tour of modern finance and think about how we can use
that and incorporate that, what it might mean
for portfolio theory, what different views of
the market there are, and how people have different
roles in it and they do. I know it's been a long morning and I'll rev you up
with something easy. Let's just go back
to the Merton theory and put that hat on. Here the purpose of financial
markets is intermediation. There's people saving
for retirement. There's firms who are issuing
equity. That's its purpose. There is heterogeneity. The people in this
model don't have jobs, they don't have businesses, they don't have outside
income streams. They're just wealth maximizers, but they are
heterogeneous in one way. They have different
risk aversion. So you need to write
down a model with equilibrium and how
are people going to be heterogeneous if you
want a portfolio theory. As you know what comes
out in the IID case, we come up with this
beautiful two-fund theorem, which I've been
hoping we could do in terms of long-term
payouts as well. Now already, that is a very useful general equilibrium
for portfolio advice. Why do I say that? Sigma
inverse Mu does not work. It's taken years and
years, decades of work. Again, I'm going to use John Luis' book as a touchstone, but many people here have I
worked on this stuff to get the basics of the time variation into a sensible Merton theory. We still can't do the cross-sectional on
the Sigma inverse Mu, but if you've got that equilibrium
view in the back of your mind, you don't have to. There's just two funds and I got to choose
those two funds. In fact, now how do I know where I go on the
two-fund theorem? Well, now we'll take a survey and find out your
risk aversion coefficient. We all know how well that works. Surveys of how people feel
stuff is how you start down the road to behavioral finance because they answer
all crazy stuff, but at least maybe our
investor could answer, are you more or less risk averse
than the average person? Well, that might be a better way than saying what
are your hobbies. Do you like to fly hang gliders or do you like to stay
home in the basement? Which that doesn't work so well. Of course people tend to say, "I'm less risk averse than average too" and then
they tend to change their mind, but we'll get the time-varying risk
aversion in a minute. Let me offer then a
completely different view of what markets do and I'm going to offer three or
four different views. One completely different view is that financial markets
do something else. I want to think here about
outside income risk. One, the biggest
thing wrong with modern portfolio theory is
that everybody who comes to the market has some
non-marketed income stream or wealthy investors all have small businesses or real
estate or something else. Our institutions
have our salaries. Every institutional investor
has a liability stream. That's like other than not paying taxes if
you don't have to. The fact of your outside
liability stream is the first-order thing. You see our
endowments panicking. It's because they
still got to pay our salaries no matter what
happens on the market. Let's put that fact
into finance and it's a fundamentally different
view of markets that says that markets are there
as a giant insurance market. People want to hedge outside incomes or
outside liabilities. That hedging demand creates non-market factors if there is an average mass of
people who want a short one industry or one stock that sends
prices around, but now it's like the thing we've talked
about for a long time. Let's start portfolio advice by hedging your
outside income stream. Problem with that, of course,
is it's very, very hard. The reason it's hard
is because marking to market a non-market stream
is very difficult to do. Given the dividends
of the S&P 500, I don't think anybody
in this room, if we couldn't see the price, none of us could come
within a factor of five of what the actual
price of the S&P 500 is. Even less can we say how
much did that price change. There's no news in
the cash flow and yet somehow you're supposed
to wake up and market is down 50 percent. Nobody wants to do that. That's the part in looking at one period returns that hedge outside incomes because we
can't mark those to market. That's where I think
that's fallen part, but so here the two
ideas fit together. If you look at dividend streams, then I think we can more
easily find dividend streams. I started with this one
because at least it's a coherent and plausible, if not true, general
equilibrium view. We know who's selling and
we know who's buying. If you're buying value, you could at least
ask the question, but there's somebody else who I'm not exposed to
value in my business. Somebody else is. They're selling, I'm buying. It's an unsettling view because
it doesn't describe what happens when you talk to value managers,
they're not real clear. It doesn't yet pass the
look in the mirror test. They're not really
clear on who should be shorting value, and that goes for the
other ones. It's funny. This is a very reasonable
view of the world, but if so, why are we as a
profession and why is the industry all so focused
on finding price factors, on giving Alpha advice to the measure zero
mean-variance investor, whereas everybody
else in the market should be trying to hedge? Number 1 thing that
we could do is really work on trying to help people to hedge the outside
income streams. The finance industry
really wants to do this. They want to tailor a portfolio to you and charge you
a fee for doing it, which is a reasonable
thing to do. That would give a reason for fees and for
tailored portfolios. Let me move on quickly
to a macro finance. What do I do? We've
learned a lot. [inaudible] the years, I put up a partial list,
recursive utility habits, ambiguity aversion,
cross-sectional risk, preference heterogeneity, rare disasters, technological
growth options. Our view of the market I'm
emphasizing the theories, but you of course
know the facts that motivate these theories as well. I'm emphasizing theory
because we're trying to put general equilibrium theory
in our thinking about this. Well, what are the
portfolio implications of all this tremendous
amount of work, including habits,
my own favorite? Zero, nothing. All of these models, the portfolio implication is
hold the market portfolio and we see why prices
might change so what are we going to do? Add heterogeneity of an
interesting type as suggested by the models and then we'll
know who should be buying and who
should be selling. Habits are the example
I know best. You look at the asset prices and
the habit model and wow, here we go, time-varying
risk premium, market timing. Let's do it. Then you do the look in the
mirror test and you say, wait a minute, my risk aversion went up just as
everybody else's did. I sit on the market portfolio. But heterogeneity
is natural here. Habits are pairable
in some sense for data or fixed streams
of liabilities. What happened to
universities in 2008? One view is they didn't realize they had this debt stream, our salaries; their assets came closer to the debt streams. Their ability to fund that. What did they did their risk reversion went up like crazy. Maybe you and me don't have such debt so we should
be in a world like that. We should be buying, the university should be selling and that gives us a view. Now of course, if
universities are, if they are that investor, they should be investing
very differently. First, they should be investing
in a way that reflects the fact of that time dang risk aversion,
which they're not. Rare disasters is another
good one to think about. Rare disasters is
very unsettling. I think we seem to have a once in a century
disaster every 10 years. Rare disasters means that
statistics are hopeless. All that matters is
the covariance during the rare disaster. Well,
what does that tell? Well, again, it says, let's add some heterogeneity who is and isn't exposed to what
the rare disasters are? It also says we got
to do economics, we got to do general
equilibrium. You're not going to get
anything out of statistics. Monthly datas aren't going
to tell you anything about what happens in
the rare disaster. The other principle
of asset management, you got to do more
risk management; that the Fed does stress testing
is very interesting. The most beautiful
risk management, the models in the
world and the value at risk models and banks, the
Fed doesn't trust them. If wants to do some economic
thinking and stress testing. That's a lesson that I think
we should apply as well. Of course, the models with heterogeneity
have heterogeneity. Now it may not be
true heterogeneity, but that's one place
where this is working. Trading and liquidity. I wanted to bring this
up because there's a fundamentally
different view of how markets work and
what markets are for. Are markets there for issuing equity to fund investment
and retirement saving? Are markets there's a giant
insurance market? Maybe not. Maybe the whole purpose of
market is to facilitate, let's call it information
trading or speculation. Now, that's a totally
different purpose and a totally different
heterogeneity. There's informed and uninformed and we only went pay
attention to these people who want to speculate or need liquidity versus long-term
investors who don't. Portfolio implications for
the long-term investor are stay out of this game, but you have to understand what the game is in order
to stay out of it. Now, you might say
this is small, but it's not necessarily small. We've seen these spreads
all over the place. As one example, let's
look at the spread between AAA bonds and
30-year Treasuries. Now I left out credit risk, but it's not anyway, credit risk is not
going to change this. Right now the AAA
bonds are 2.6 percent. Treasury is at 1.7
percent, so you say, yeah, 90 basis points and then he didn't do the
credit spread and so forth. But wait a minute, that's not nine-tenths of a percentage
point difference. That's 53 percent
better; if you look at things by what price do I
pay for a dividend stream, the AAA's are 53 percent
better dividend stream for the same price so persistent
liquidity spreads can matter a lot to
long-term investment. Now you might say,
well, wait a minute, what if it's 2008 again and
the AAA spread widens and I can't sell these things and they become a liquid and to
which I say, wait a minute, you told me you were
the long-term investor, maybe we need to look at the look in the mirror test once more and I'm talking
to you universities who said you didn't
need liquid securities and then you tried to sell it all; so that look in the mirror test is
always very important. Now, I'm going to emphasize
trading here because I think it's a hobby horse of mine that I think we haven't
paid enough attention to. I was very inspired by the brilliant Lamont and
Thaler 3Com Palm event, which I encourage
you to go look at. It is a case where the demand to do a lot of information
trading was so strong, pushed the price of one
security up so high that you could see a clear
violation of arbitrage. But the pattern is general. There is a strong correlation that we haven't paid
enough attention to, I think, between high prices, low expected returns, and a
lot of trading volume and the trading volume, it's high bid-ask spread its trading
despite high bid-ask spreads. There's a churn, a frenzy of trading when people
think they have a lot of information about some. These are graphs
from an old paper. This is the price and trading
volume of NASDAQ tech and NYSE in the last boom and
bust, I shouldn't say bubble. Here's a cross-sectional
regression. It's not just between the exchanges
on individual stocks. There's a strong correlation between; Fama-MacBeth
t-statistic of 7.5 of price versus
trading volume. There's an emerging view in here I think that small growth
is just a terrible return, but it's where all the active trading is
because it's where all the information is or all the speculation
is at least. What do you take of that view of the
world? Well you take stay away, avoid that stuff. Avoid stuff with
high market-to-book and if you're taking a
trading view, high turnover, lots of short demand,
short constraints, lots of news, the sexy stuff, stay away from
Tesla and Bitcoin. Liquidity is a different thing. There's demand for trading
versus supply of liquidity. Treasuries are liquid,
there's a lot of trading, not because people have a
lot of information about it, but because people don't
have information about it. Again, you want to
stay away from, not harvest the liquidity
premium they say, and I find that one harder though for the
long-term investor, I know I'm not a speculator. Do I really know that I'm not the one who wants liquidity? Well, universities felt they were the
ones who didn't want liquidity and they
turned out to be wrong. In this thinking, I think it's very important to have to complete the model. In most of our models although their general equilibrium
they're not complete. There's some exogenous
liquidity [inaudible] . We've talked about this
in the last paper. There's this exogenous demand for high-frequency trading.
Where does that come from? Now, if you're doing a model of the market,
it doesn't matter. But if you're going to extend
this to portfolio theory, you want to make sure you
look in the mirror and that's not me and for that you can't just make it an
exogenous demand for liquidity if you
want to make sure that I'm not the one who
needs that liquidity. Frictions, we also
just talked about, this is the exciting new thing going on as you all
know, in asset pricing. I tried to put up some
of the buzzwords here to institutional finance,
intermediary pricing, slow-moving capital,
supply and demand, what we'll see paper tomorrow, price pressure and so forth. Now, there are, of course, what does this all mean for the long only for our endowments,
for retirement investors? There's a big potential here, which is why we put it in
conferences like this. If there are institutional
constraints and arbitragers and so
forth out there, well, maybe we, the
long-term investors, should be funding
some of that and harvesting the obvious Alpha that would come from doing so. I was getting annoyed by these models with
is the investor, the intermediary in the
market, and they say, wait a minute, there's
E-trade, I can go there. Go there, harvest,
some of this stuff, get [inaudible] seven. In fact, that happens, large institutional
investors have learned they should do
securities lending, and therefore harvest some
of that small premium. It's not a new idea. Now thought for the future, this is a new and
interesting literature which hasn't really
gotten to the point. But how are we going
to bring this to the portfolio application
that we're going to take that seriously and not
just as an excuse. There's a lot of stuff
that's excuses for active management that end up not working out
after the fact. I do think we need to face
the fact that there is still, it's very hard to find Alpha in studies of
active management. If you read the pages of
the journal of finance, if you came down from Mars and
read the journal of finance, you think, Oh my god, there's
Alpha all over the place. Look at these anomalies, this morning already
we had uncovered interest parity and a
couple of percentage points you can make by buying
the oil companies, or selling the oil companies. But look at all these
anomalies out there. But then you go read the
page of the journal finance, where they do studies
of manager performance, and it's the same dismal story. There's just no Alpha anywhere. We got to take that seriously, if we're going to take the
portfolio implications of institutional
finance seriously, why are we bailing out
the banks every 10 years and not them paying us off
their arbitrage profits? Now, I think an obvious answer is that we just got to count. I'm thinking like a very
interesting new supply and demand models. Just got to calibrate
this, that the shock, the prices is
extremely persistent. There's very little
one period Alpha, but then a good opportunity to buy a dividend
stream at a low price. That may be one answer to it. This is a case where theory
is different from fact. Theory says we
ought to be able to institutional investors
like Stanford's endowment who pays $800 million in fees, keep
getting that wrong, ought to be able to
make a lot of money by investing in hedge fund if this capital constraint and
ammeters will give them some capital or start
up, for $800 million, startup a bank that can
harvest UIP for you. Why not? They don't do that. They don't even
come close to that. They're liquidity
demanders, not suppliers. Just why is that I think
we need to think about. Of course, we need to add
sensible heterogeneity that includes everybody in this market if we're going
to make sense of it. This is more of a
question, a placeholder. I wanted to bring up that there's
Merton and then there's fundamentally different views
of what the markets are there for. Why people are in them, why they're heterogeneous. Why you ought to believe
that you're going to earn something for doing something other
than the market. This is the new view of finance and our job at the next
conference where I hope Monica and Lewis will find some actual portfolio papers
can incorporate this view. Let me close out. I think
this is not a backwater, not a completely solved problem,
but huge opportunities. Not just in us doing
portfolio theory, but in marketing
portfolio theory too, and I think those two
things do go hand in hand. If you can't market
it to your mom, then maybe you need to really understand the theory
or the empirics better. I think just to recap, I think putting on the
view of the dividend view, the idea that the fundamental, the long-term investor wants state and time
conventions instead cash flows and thinking about what those are and how
to buy them cheaper, even if under the hood, we have complicated dynamic portfolio strategies
with value functions, at least matching that thing to the investor on
the basis of the final cash flow stream with
some good risk management and making sure that you don't
come up for some reason. Here we are at the
markets didn't go down, and our many universities
have hiring freezes, and they are therefore, we have a savings, we have an investment cash
flow correlation, even with $35
billion in the bank, that just makes no
sense whatsoever. Somebody didn't think about
the cash flows matching the stochastic nature of
our outside income stream well enough. Think about
things in terms of payoff. Think in terms of
general equilibrium. Start every portfolio discussion with the average investor
theorem and how to avoid being on the
menu with the lions rather than at the table. As we look for the immense
progress we've made in theory and fact with the
representative investor in the back of our minds, I think we're ready to start thinking about the same
theories and facts. I think the fundamentally
novel view is about what asset
markets are there to do with heterogeneity in mind and therefore to help
them with portfolio theory. I tried to put up to close
with some simple advice. Don't pay taxes needlessly. Don't forget the average
investor theorem. Tailor portfolios
to an understanding of why you're different
than average. We've got to start
thinking about how can we in practice hedge
outside income. I know this has been
a lot of work on it, but it just hasn't
worked in practice. I think we can work on it. Do some risk management, economic risk management;
fees is always a problem. We say don't pay fees, the industry collects fees. I always felt embarrassed
teaching MBAs, that they paid a lot
of money for me to tell them the markets
are efficient then you should just index, and then they had to go
out and charge fees. Well, I think in this vision, he has a vision of an industry that does what Fidelity
seems to want to do. Helps with things that are not just taking money
from the other guy. Helps match people to portfolios that are right
for their nature of heterogeneity and their views
of, because there's still view question of
where they sit in the world and why the
market owes them something. Maybe we don't have
to feel embarrassed about sending
students out to run. In fact, maybe we have some
business opportunities for you. Thank you. 