John Taylor: Thanks,
Jim, very much for your kind introduction and
thank you-all for coming. It's an honor and a
genuine pleasure to give the Marty
Feldstein lecture, especially the first one. Marty is a good friend. I admire him greatly
for many things. But since we're
all economists for his insistence on
using economic theory and results to improve people's lives and I've
seen that many ways. But also to get
involved in the fray, whether it's President
Reagan's CEA or it's President Obama's tax
for what it stands for us. Also political
campaigns, etc. that I always remember this
that I have a tie. It's called democracy is
not a spectator sport and I think that really holds
for economists as well. It's an honor and a
pleasure to be here. Jim gave me pretty
clear instructions and I wrote them down here a
little bit to make sure I didn't depart too much. He actually mentioned
them a little bit in the introduction. The Feldstein lecture will address an important question in applied economics with
application to policy. It also will not make any
policy recommendations. I'm going to put this
up here at the top, especially during the Q&A
to make sure I don't drift into the recommendations
category. What I'd like to do is
in terms of keeping with that overall goal
or strategy is to think of this as a
particular purpose, if you like, for the
Feldstein lecture, I see I have a warning
about a virus. It wasn't a gimmick as part of a teaching technique,
don't worry. But actually, Jim, one thing
you said about the grape. It wasn't actually a grape, it was a raisin. Some of you may remember, some of you older people there used to be a wonderful TV ad for California raisins and
it'd be cartoon characters look like California
raisins and they dance around the stage two Marvin
Gaye's heard through the grapevine and it's
really a terrific add. I had the idea one
day that I would use this in my class
to demonstrate government intervention
and how it leaves the more intervention because
this ad was designed to increase the demand for
raisins and therefore reduce the cost of a government
subsidy for raisins. That was the whole idea. I remember the first
time I did it, it's like a scary thing to do. How crazy can this guy be?
But it worked out okay. I don't do it anymore.
That's for sure. But to get serious, so what I'd like to do is focus on macro economic policy. That's my field. Look at policy evaluation. During the period really
since the fall of 2008, I think since the panic period
of following the crisis. I want to compare policy with some counterfactuals
and since the challenge of policy evaluation is to think of what the alternative
was in terms of policy. It's very easy to say, well,
that was a good policy, that was a bad policy, wasn't so good, this
is wasn't so bad. But in a macro and I think especially all fields
quite frankly, you need to think
of a counterfactual in order to evaluate policies. A lot of this lecture actually is trying to become
more formal about evaluating policies that we're still learning about
using counterfactuals. As you'll see, I'm going to
look a counterfactual for monetary policy and then I'll go look at it a counterfactual
for fiscal policy. Each of those record a broad
subjects in some sense and involve a lot of
sub counterfactuals which I'd like to address. In some sense, this is
a massive undertaking to think about an evaluation of monetary policy
and fiscal policy since the panic of last fall. Although, every day
you hear people pontificating about this
was good and this was bad. But I think in principle, from our perspectives
of economists, it requires a lot
of careful study. It's real time, of course, and that's why I use the term because the crisis is ongoing. I want to emphasize
real-time here is in a sense as a unifying theme. I think right now
with this crisis, real-time analysis is essential. We have things
changing every day. We have new policies
being proposed. Presumably they
should be based on analysis of things
that are going on. I would say based on
my own experience in the last few years, it's tremendously
interesting to study this. It's a tragedy we're
having this crisis. But you can't think of it more interesting set of
data to look at, and you never seen these
pint of policies before. It's an enormous amount
of things to look at. I think it also raises
questions about research. I'm going to emphasize we need
more high frequency data. We need to figure out ways to
do our policy evaluations. From the point of view of macro, I think it really is
different and I want to spend a couple of
minutes on that subject of why is real-time
analysis like I'm going to discuss
different from what we have done normally
done in macro. I'm going to use a
couple of examples. Now, first one is from my
own work many years ago, where I tried to evaluate different types of
monetary policy rules. The idea was to
see whether, say, a fixed growth rate rule for the money supply was better
than a feedback rule, always better than reality. That wasn't done in
real time by any means. In fact, this paper
published in 1979 focused on roughly 20 years
from 1953 to '75, so that's completely
not real time. It's partly publication lags, but partly looking at
history if you like. For that work, I use a
graph like this which I think illustrates this
concept of counterfactuals. This is a graph which shows you a policy macro
trade-off between how volatile the economy
is in terms of GDP on the vertical axis and how volatile inflation is
on the horizontal axis. Price stability,
inflation stability, the two main factors
we look at a lot of output stability
and price stability. In this picture is this
trade-off which can be calculated but optimal
be on a trade-off because you'd like to have as low amount of
both as possible. But you can also see
the counterfactuals. One counterfactual is the
constant growth rate rule and of course you see
actual US performance. In this case, the
constant growth rate rule looks actually a little better
than actual performance. Not quite completely dominating, but since you've got such
a much larger amount of reduction and output variance if you like
it's preferred. That's an example of how macro research has
and the same lines Marty and Jim stock in
1997 published a paper which they looked at different
feedback rules for M2. Again, they looked at
the period '59 and '92, not exactly real-time
methodology being quite similar. Steve to Chetty, some
of his colleagues published a paper in 2006, the same strategy they're
looking to see to what extent the great moderation
could have been due to monetary policy
looked at 24 countries, their sample period
was '82 to '98, again, not exactly real-time. Then Ben Bernanke in a paper he published before he
became chairman. He has the same concept. He's looking at
what the cause for the great moderation was. He uses a diagram
like we have up here, same picture essentially and says was the improvement
in performance, that is movement
towards the origin to lower variability of
inflation and output due to monetary policy or to do some structural
shifts that moves that trade-off curve
to the origin. Again, it's really
longer-term considerations. What policy would work well on average over periods of time? Not exactly real time. That's some of the
way it's been. Actually, Lars Svensson just found out recently is
doing something more in the direction of what
I'm talking about here. That is to see if you
could modify some of those techniques to
actually do real-time. His paper has a picture, similar to the others. Here's what it is. But on the vertical
axis you don't have the historical or
theoretical variance of GDP on the vertical axis or inflation on the
horizontal axis. You have the forecast
by the central bank. In this case, what
he's imagining is the central bank, this case, the Riggs Bank is considering
different types of paths for the interest rate, say back in February. You can see what the different
past deliver based on a forecast of inflation and
output for the near future. In that sense, it's
getting closer to a formal policy analysis, but really much in real-time. Lars paper, for example,
published I think in March, is evaluating Riggs Bank
policy in February using this. It's really I think
reflecting what I think is a need and a
trend to find ways to use these techniques
which have been a very common in current analysis. I also want to say that
when I think about my role here in terms
of evaluating policy, I want to focus on only one part of the
financial crisis. I think it's important
to emphasize that I think of the financial crisis is best thought of as
so far four stages. Who knows what the fifth will be or the sixth or
seventh or whatever. But the fourth stage
is, I think of as years leading
up to the crisis, so that you look at
the root causes of it. I happen to think
through my real-time policy evaluation
research that there was a great deviation in policy
very low interest rates degenerated the
excesses if you like. I'm not going to talk
about that today. Then you have the period
from the flare up in August of 2007 till
September 2008, where things seem to just
get worse if you like, at least did not improve with
respect to the stability in the financial markets
and I blame that on it. I feel like a great delay
in the policy responses using real-time policy analysis. I'm not going to talk
about that today either. Then finally, you had
this incredible panic that we all know about. A couple of pictures
of the panic. This is the S&P 500 index. A huge drop there is in September,
early October period. I have some dates there for various
things that happened, you have the TARP, the Lehman bankruptcy, etc. A huge issue here is still real-time about
what caused this was Lehman was it policy
scares or whatever, if you'd like the third aspect
the panic and I actually think it was due to
some scare by policy, so maybe that's the
great scale run lock on to talk about that either. What I'm going to talk
about is this last point, and that is the
post-panic period. If you'd like, I'm going into some new ground
for this lecture, and I'd like to try to examine, if you like, policy during
this very recent period, I think it's very important to try to understand
it as best we can using the best techniques
and the best data we have. Now, the first thing
you need to do policy evaluation is
describe the actual policy. It's not easy, it's complicated, I'm going to take
a few minutes on what the actual policy was. First of all, during the week of 17th of September,
reserve balances, the reserves that
depository institutions hold at the Fed increased, actually for the
first time above the level required to keep the federal funds
rate on target, I'll show you a picture
about that in a minute. At that point, the
federal funds rate was at two percent. First of all, first point here, this is quantitative
easing in the sense it reserves rose above
a level required to keep the rate at
a certain point. Interest rates were not at
zero at that point in time, interest rates were
at two percent. Frequently you will hear
quantitative easing occurred because the interest
rate hit zero, that is not the way this
happened you can see, so it's a different
characterization, and you frequently
hear, but I'll show you that that's actually
what happened. I think you'll see that reserves were increased for a
particular reason that it was to finance some
loans first through a new loan facility called the Primary Dealer Credit
Facility, the PDCF, so the Fed was
making those loans that had to finance
them by money creation, by crediting, through the
deposits of the banks at the Fed and then
of course also to purchase securities
of various kinds. I think it's also important in terms of understanding this, and it deserves research, but I'm pretty convinced that these reserves were
not increased as frequently people say to accommodate a shift in
the demand for money. Increased demand for money
or a decline in velocity, these are existing exogenous supply increase in reserves, so we need to be sure
about that as well but I think I could be
clear about that. Then, of course,
reserves continued to increase through the
end of last year, as additional securities
and loans were made. This actually drove
the interest rate to zero, as I'll show
you in a minute, the FOMC ratified those
declines to zero, and of course,
reserves have remained elevated ever since. Now, here's the pictures
that describe that slide. First of all, these are
the reserve balances that I mentioned that jumped sometime during the
week of September 17th. We don't have daily
data unfortunately, to know exactly when, at least we don't have
it outside the Fed, but at some time during the
week of September 17th. You can see reserves
jumped from a level which was being used to monitor
the interest rate, started moving and
got up to 800, and has been actually at
that level pretty closely, we don't know where it's going, but it's hovered around that level with some ups
and downs ever since. These are just another way to visualize this
shorter period of time, you can now see if
you look closely that the first jump there, which at the time was huge, It was $60 billion
on September 17th, that was to provide
for the loans through the Primary
Dealer Credit Facility as far as I can tell, though, there's no record of why that decision
was made anywhere. Then you have reserves
increasing rapidly, the bar chart show you the weekly average
is the black line, end of the weekend
in Wednesday and you can see they go right through the most recent data
at this high level. Some more visuals here, a couple of visuals,
if you like colors, these are great but
these try to give you a sense of the purchases
that were made, that were financed through
that reserve creation. By the way, the scale
starts at 400 billion, so it's just cut off
at the bottom but the very bottom is the
treasury securities. If you go off to
the very far right, you can see those starting to increase the very bottom one, those are the
recent purchases of medium-term treasuries
by the Fed, that's what that thing
is over at the end. You have the term
auction facility, which was created earlier
in the crisis but expanded right after
the panic dramatically, that's the green line. You also have what's
labeled here, just private portfolio, I'll show you that in a minute, but that's expanded quite a bit. You have also the loans or
swaps to other central banks, that's the yellow
one near the top, and you have some of
the other assets, it's a small amount
at the very top. You can see these are things
that were created and the reason for the
reserve increase was to finance the
purchases of them. This category which,
if you can see it, the purple one, a
private portfolio, here's the details of that one. What's in that private portfolio are the Bear Stearns securities, some of the AIG securities, and most significantly, the commercial paper
funding facility which was generated
during the panic, as very well-received
program to get the commercial paper
market moving again. Then the mortgage-backed
securities purchases, which is very large now and it started since the
beginning of this year and has expanded
dramatically, of course, those need to be
financed through reserve creation as well. That's basically the reason for the expansion of
the balance sheet. Now the interest rate decline, remember it started at two
and came down to zero, I just want to just show
you that in this picture. What this picture shows
you is the factor of federal funds rate
during this period. You can see it was
well above zero, two percent during this
expansion of reserves. Again, this is not a sense
in which the interest rates hit zero and the
quantitative easing began, quantitative easing
effectively drove down that interest
rate towards zero. You can see the
pattern very clearly, it seems to me, of course, by the end of the year, the interest rate was
between zero and 0.25. Now, just a little bit of decision-making
timing on this, so we can think this through. I've listed the three FOMC votes during this period about
the federal funds rate, and all this is trying to show is that each of those votes occurred when the
rate was already below what they were
voting to bring it to. For example, on October 8th, the FOMC voted to cut the
federal funds rate from two 1.5 from two percent but for the two weeks
ending that day, the funds' rate was
already 1.45 percent. Then on October 29th, they vote to cut it
to one from 1.5, the rate was already
below that, and so on. This is essentially
a ratification of rates that had
already been determined. That's the actual policy. The question is, was
that a good policy? We don't know, how would we evaluate that policy
one way or the other? Got to choose a
counterfactual, so not easy. One general counter-factual, which I would have chosen
before this if you like, is to think about what
would have happened, is fairly standard, and that is fanner factor is when the optimal
interest rate, tailor or whatever you want, hits zero, and let's just
say slightly positive, something like 0.25
makes more sense. Then the trading desk, this objective is to keep the level of reserves
consistent with that 0.25 or 0.125 or whatever. Also on the side, make sure the growth rate
of money does not fall, so in a sense, it's like a
constant growth rate rule, at least it focuses
on the money supply, but it doesn't expand the
reserves a tremendous rate, it's quantitative in a sense, the focus is bringing reserves to a level consistent
with the 0.25, but it's a much different type of zero interest rate bound policy, then it was followed. In some sense, this is how quantitative macro-monetary
models are simulated, such as the ones
that Volker Wieland presented here yesterday. Also, it seems to me it does avoid the Great Depression
that Japan lost decade problem because
it doesn't allow money growth to decline, you would not try to keep
the federal funds rate from falling below 0.25 by
reducing money growth, that's not what is meant here. Now, I think this is a good
way to think about it, but quite frankly, I think in designing
counterfactuals practically, probably better to get a little closer to what the
actual policy was, and so that's really
what I want to do, I don't want to go
to that extreme, I want to consider a
counter-factual which is closer to the actual policy. For that more specific
counterfactual, I want to just do three things differently than
the actual policy. These are some of the
sub counterfactuals that I'm talking about. The first is that there are no mortgage-backed
securities purchases, you saw that in the picture, rather than 500 billion is
where they are about now, and are expected to
rise to 1.2 trillion, just don't do any of those. Second, don't have the
term auction facility, it is at zero billion dollars rather than something that rose to as much as 500 billion. The term auction facility
is the way that banks can borrow from the Fed without going through
the discount window, through an option,
a special thing set up in December 2007. The third thing is no
purchases of medium-term, longer-term treasury securities, so that's zero as well, rather than up to the 300, which they can do is
now approximately 200, I understand. That's like a more
modest counterfactual, that's what I want to think of here as my counterfactual, I feel like. What does that do? Let's first look at the charts. That's how things
were originally with reserve balances,
just a huge jump. This is how they would be with the counterfactual. Two things, we look at those, it's about half as
much of an increase. It's substantial. They wouldn't have
started increase, they would have been at a lower level for awhile
because the fed would have been lowering the
federal funds rate without expansion of reserves. Most important, they're
already back to normal, if you like, back to
roughly $8-10 billion is where they were before
this expansion, already back. The questions that you sometimes hear that Rick Michigan was
talking about this morning, the questions about
the balance sheet of independence and
all those things, they'd be gone by now
if this was the policy. They wouldn't be increasing
if this was the policy. Unless there was suddenly
a big increase in demand for AIG type bailouts
or something, which I'm assuming there's not. That's that picture. You can also look at
it with respect to the just this little section
here with the bar charts, it's the same picture. But if you feel
like, but you can see how much different it is. This is more like a
classic expansion of reserves on a temporary basis because of the crisis which
are then pulled out of the system as fast
as reasonable. Then here's what if you like does to those charts over there. These is the things that cause the reserves to increase the purchases of all
those securities. This is what it would look
like with my counterfactual. What you're missing, you see the Taft
loans disappear. That's the green
that goes away and the private portfolio
gets much smaller. I call private
portfolio purchases of mortgage-backed securities
and AIG, etc. like that. That's much smaller.
That's the biggest issue. Note also though,
that towards the end you see securities
going up again, those are treasury
bills because this counterfactual
reduces the purchases so much that the fed
actually comes in and does regular open market operations through buying treasury bills, not long-term securities in order to keep the
reserves from going below the level of
consistent with the 0.25 target interest rate. Then finally, recall this
was the private portfolio, and the big bulge there is the mortgage-backed
securities and this is what it's going to look
like with the counterfactual. Basically just chopping off those mortgage-backed
securities. Question is, what
would this look like? I'd say first of all,
interest rate is not going to be any
different, right? The interest rate path is
the same in the factual, in the actual and in
the counterfactual. Put that aside for
the time being. But what's going to
be a lot different are these purchases programs. The policy now has to
look at each of those. If those all turn you
have to say what's going on with each of those, how much different
will the economy look because mortgage-backed securities weren't purchased, because the Taft doesn't work, because of no purchases
of long-term treasuries? I've done a lot of work on
these topics and I'm going to summarize them for you here. First, with respect to
mortgage-backed securities. They were undertaken, those purchases in order
to reduce mortgage rates. Purchase mortgage-backed
securities increased the supply, you reduce the yield on the
securities and many people, says almost conventional
wisdom is that this did its job and the picture
of that is here. This is the spread between 30
year fixed mortgage rates. It's tabulated by
Freddie Mac series versus 10-year treasuries. It's because of the
30-year mortgages are paid back before 30 years, you use 10 years roughly
as the maturity, and so that gives
you your spread. You can see that, that did come down
dramatically and here is the picture of the purchases of the
mortgage-backed securities. You can see they're jumping up right there about the same time and they're going up
towards the 500 billion. Of course, the timing
is quite right. It looks just exactly like
what you think it should be. You might just say, well, this is just did it. The question though
it seems to me is, first of all, if you
just did a regression, it's not going to
help you very much because it doesn't explain the rise and the spreads in the first place, it's missing. Why did that surprise
and spreads occur? If to me I say, well, if this is going to
be the explanation, I, at least, need
to find a way to control for something
that may be causing that rise and perhaps the fall independent to those purchases. What might you use
for that purpose? Well, one of the advantages
of the CDS markets is there are CDS instruments
and all sorts of things including banning
free securities. The blue line is the CDS
on Fannie Mae bonds. That's a measure, if you like, of perceived risk from
these institutions during the period before they were officially part of
the government, when they were just government
sponsored agencies with some expectation of
government rescue or bailout. That's the blue
line. Unfortunately, because of the demise
of Fannie and Freddie, we no longer have the CDS
on Fannie and Freddie. The blue line stops at
that point in time. I wish some over
the counter guys would be doing some
CDS is on this, but they don't so far
I can't find any. What I have here
is the red line, and this is simply the spread
between Fannie Mae bonds, the bonds that they
issue to raise funds and treasuries
of similar maturity. It looks like a pretty
good relationship between CDS measure of
risk in some sense. Possible thing would
be to simply take either a predicted
value of the CDS or just take the spread itself, spread on Fannie Mae bonds
and treasuries itself, as a measure of risk or perceived risk of
Fannie and Freddie and use that in the
analysis of the spreads. Well, not surprising if you're looking at these
charts very closely, that spread explains
a large amount of the movement in the
MBS spread itself. Just look at it. Let me go back to the, that's the spread, the MBS spread that we're
concerned about the mortgages. This is the spread
between Fannie, Freddie is the same borrowing
and treasuries. They move very closely. A statistical analysis
regression or whatever, which includes the red
variable there and explaining that red variable is
going to do very well. Well in fact that when
you include it along with the mortgage-backed
securities purchases, suitably scaled or whatever. Mortgage-backed securities
has very small impacts, hardly significant, hard to get the right sign
quite frankly. But with the most
reasonable regression, this is what we found. This is basically taking
the estimated equation of the spread 30
year fixed mortgage versus 10 year treasuries. Examining and a counterfactual
of what would have happened had there
been no MBS purchases. In this regression, there is an impact of the MBS purchases. But of course, it is very
small on the order of 10 basis points at the most when you come to as
the end of this. This would suggest that not
much different would have happened if you'd
take this statistics, if the MBS purchases
had not taken place. Now, I'm sure there's lots of reasons you can bring that this may not
be the definitive answer. To some extent, my purpose
here is to show that you need to do something
one way or the other to prove what is the right answer. I'm quite convinced
to hear that there's something else going on and
simply those purchases. The null hypothesis, of course, is that you have a
term structure of interest rates and supplies
don't matter that much, so in some sense, the null hypothesis
from finance theory, term structure of interest
rates even with risk, is that it's not going
to have much effect. That's what the
data seem to show. That's the first thing. Second thing is the TAF. I'm going to take to
try to go through this a little more quickly, but in some sense a
little more complicated. This is the only one
picture for all this. This is the impact of the
term auction facility. First of all, the
green line is the term Auction Facility,
amounts outstanding during this period. You can see that how they
started and as I said, in December 2007, started to increase and then we'll ratchet it
up by huge amounts of the amount that could be purchased and the terms
and the maturity, etc. and they rose to a
roughly 500 billion at the peak and now, starting to drift down. The other two lines,
the blue line, in particular, focus
on the blue line, if you like lowest, I call it. That's the Libor OIS spread. The spread between three-month, I use three-month,
three-month inter-bank loans. That's Libor and OIS, the expectation of the
overnight Federal funds rate during those three-month period. That blue line,
early in the crisis, let's think was the
best measure of the turbulence in
the banking sector. In the fall of 2007,
John Williams, a friend of mine to
the San Francisco Fed and I did research
on trying to explain the first little blip there and the blue line back
in August of 2007 and we decided that the
among explanations, it was most likely due to a counterparty risk
problem between the banks, not due to a liquidity problem. One of our proofs of
that was the red line. Red line is the spread between Libor and
Repo, basically, unsecured credit Libor
versus secured credit repos, repos secured by
government bonds. You can see that since
that moves so closely, our work really began
before the panic, well before the panic, but it moved very
closely so much that the term auction facility
couldn't play much of a role. If you look really closely, the term Auction
Facility started in December of 7 and started to rise and
at that point though, Libor OIS spread did come down. Early on there was some
positive assessments of that the term auction
facility was working in terms of driving down the spread and the
interbank market, but interbank market quickly deteriorated and even
though the TAF went up. Then finally, through
the panic period, you see that the Libor
OIS rose dramatically. I think I have reasons for
why I think that occurred, but put those aside
for a minute. But you also have the red line moving up almost
in parallel now, so at this point is
absolutely no question that these Libor OIS spreads the turbines and
the banking market has to do with
counterparty risk, not just a broad measure of liquidity that would
be provided through banks find it easy to borrow from the Fed through the
term auction facility. This picture, it seems to
me shows pretty clearly the term Auction Facility
can have much of an effect on at least Libor
OIS on this thing that the Fed would like to have lowered Libor in particular. It does stand up to a
lots of econometrics. You can do say, econometrics that way, but I think the
picture, in a sense, tells all a whole story. There is disagreement
about this, I should say, some other work
that's been done, so it is ripe for
research and study, not for the purposes
of this lecture, as soon as this picture
makes it clear that the second sub
counterfactual to have, maybe, we could have
gotten away with two and maybe,
come back to that. Then the third thing, the Fed purchases of
medium-term treasuries. I'm going to have
one picture here. This is tough to test. I have done the regressions. But here's the deal. The blue line is the
cumulative Fed purchases of long-term treasuries. You can see those moving
up and presumably continuing to move up till
they get to 300 billion. We don't know what happened
to the program after that. But you also see that
10-year treasuries, which really the focus
of these purchases. Remember, the spread between the 10-year treasuries
was the basis for that spread of mortgages and so reducing treasuries would
reduce mortgage rates, which is one of the
reasons the Fed stated it wanted to
do this program. When the program was announced, there was a good move in yield. You can see that
over there towards the right before the purchases began there's a sharp
drop in yields. That was the announcement. There's no question
that in my view that that came because of
that announcement. But then you will start to
move up quite steadily. They got as high as for ease
off a bit now as you know. Clearly, there's a real question here about the impact of this program on a gut feeling. Their course, there's
lots of things to control for the economy, strengthens, picks up, there's concerns
about inflation. If you do that, the timing
of the purchases day by day, due do Delta's on the purchases and Delta's on the rates, you can't find any effect. Now, here it seems to me we
got a lot of theory that's clear that should be suspicious about this having a
big impact as well. You have the term
structure theories, supplies generally don't tend to matter after a few days. Surprises can obviously matter, but ultimately, it tends to disappear and it seems to me, that's what you're seeing here. I would have been
very surprised if you saw much else, but again, this requires an attempt
at least to try to prove, I would say it this way,
someone's got to be able to show to me that
this is working. Right now, I don't say it.
Here's the third thing. All three of these in
some sense have had, at least by this analysis, by this policy evaluation, not had the effect that there are sometimes
said to have had. In this sense, the counterfactual
I have, I laid out, which I think has some
appeal to it in a sense, we're off of the
expanded balance sheet, monetary policy is close to what it would normally
be operating. There was an expansion of reserves for the
emergency programs that the consumer of the
commercial paper market, etc. It's not a draconian in
any way, shape, or form. It seems to me this is something a basis
for saying that there are some alternatives
that would have worked as well and we'll be leaving us
in a better situation now. That's the monetary
policy evaluation. Which I have spent so much
time on monetary policy, I don't have much time on fiscal policy but maybe that's as well since I'm a monetary guy. But let's talk about
fiscal policy briefly. Here's the question is, what should be the
counterfactual? One natural one, of course, is no stimulus packages, no big counterfactual
discretionary packages. Where it's only used the
automatic stabilizers, which by the way are
not trivial because the large reason that budget
deficit has increased so much already are the
automatic stabilizers is really the reduction
in tax revenues, which has been huge and the increased automatic
increases in spending. One natural alternative
is to think about, if you like, no stimulus
packages whatsoever. Now, quite frankly,
although, people were trying to get
out there and saying, this worked in that
work and didn't. It seems to me, it's
still too early. This is real-time economics. We really got to say, sorry, we don't have enough
time in one way or the other but here's a
preliminary look if you like. Actually, the first Look is
a 2008 stimulus package. This comes from a
paper I gave it the AAA meetings in January
and this basically, tries to look at the
stimulus package of 2008. In it, what it does is show
personal disposable income as the red line from January 07 through the period of
this boot summer of 2008. It's got the disposable
income jumping dramatically with
the rebates, etc., that were paid out as part
of that stimulus package. The blue line shows
what would have happened without the
stimulus package. These are data that the
DEA collects, I think, actually, they deserve
a lot of credit for trying to put these
data together. They just come right out
of the Monthly Reports so you can get a
good estimate of what the amount of the stimulus package and then
you have PCE below that. You can see it's very
hard to find any kind of impact if you like, no jumps starting a PCE that I can detect here whatsoever. Now, it is important
to try to use regressions and
things like that, and an analysis of this that I did do the regressions
and it's hard to find significant effects of the
stimulus package here on PCE. What about the second
package, if you like? Well, here we go. Unfortunately, BA is
continuing to do its work in adjusting personal
disposable income. At the upper right
part of the diagram, you see personal disposable
income moving very rapidly. The last part is the $250
payments to individuals. It's also the beginning of
the Make Work Pay program, which is increasing income because those were tax
credits to people. That's part of the stimulus
package that's being passed. Without the stimulus package, personal disposable income will not be increasing so much, but it's jumped quite a bit. If you look back at personal
consumption expenditures, of course, you see the
drop during the panic, which wasn't in
the first picture. The panic of last fall was a real collapse
in consumption. It stabilized since then, but it's not picked up. There's absolutely
no noticeable effect of this on consumption
at this point in time. It's too early to tell,
but it seems to me, we're very much are in here
we go again situation. Not really surprising
from the point of view of economic permanent
income theory, which suggests the NPC
would be quite low for these kinds of payments
and indeed it's so low, it's hard to find it in
these pictures at all. Real-time analysis, again, I think is useful and I
would say to some extent, keeping out of the policy recommendation
area for a minute, but this picture here would seem to me
to have suggested, since it was available before the second
stimulus package, would have suggested maybe that second stimulus package would not have been the
right thing to do, but all we can do
is continue to do our empirical work
and present it to the policymakers and they
will decide, so they decided. The last thing here about the stimulus package is
government spending. I just looked at the reduction
in taxes or rebates, and onetime payments, etc. But let's talk a little bit about government purchases and I want to refer towards
the end here to some work I've done
with [inaudible] and John Cogan and it got
a lot of discussion, but I just want to just go through the numbers
here with you. This gives you the stimulus
package by year '09, 2010 fiscal year, the amount of increase
in federal purchases, which is G in our
models, purchases, and the transfers to state
and local governments, and then the increase
in the deficit, roughly speaking, the
increase in the deficit, or for things that
are not purchases or not transfers to state
and local governments. For the purpose of
figuring out how much of the increased state
and local governments is actually a result in G, government purchases at
the state and local level, we assume the rule of thumb that we have about 60
percent of the 48, for example, or 60
percent of 107. Based on that, you
get an estimate of government purchases
in its effect because that's what we're
interested in here. What would be the impact of this plan of
government purchases? Here's the picture for that. This was done before we got going with a
stimulus package, so definitely real-time, and the blue line represents
the estimates that we got, our research, of what
the stimulus package would be quarter by quarter, using the 60 percent assumption and making some
other timing things, trying to get an estimate
on a quarterly basis of how much government
purchase was to be increasing as a
percentage of GDP, starting in the first
quarter of this year, going several years
into the future. The red line is the impact using a [inaudible] model on GDP. This is trying to just bring out the latest model and
make the estimates. Again, it's still too early to tell any of these things, but one thing that's good
is the estimates we used for the first quarter
and second quarter are very close to
the payout rate. There's really not a surprise, like things are going
slower or faster than was the reasonable projections
would be, so that's good. You don't want to
complain it's slower than was it forecasted, you might complain it's
too slow or whatever, but not slower than forecast. That's basically about right. It seems to me, given that it's pretty clear that at least
from this thing, that the impacts
are not surprising, they're smaller than
observable at this point, so you'd only be getting 1.1 percent of GDP in
the first-quarter and 0.3 percent of GDP in the second quarter and with all the other things
that are happening, it'd be very hard to
detect this in the data. But anyway, nonetheless,
it seems to be consistent with the view that
these are not big impacts, these are impacts,
but they're not big, mainly because you have
the government purchases, which is really what we're
thinking about here. I looked at the transfer
payments before, but the government
purchases are spread out over a long period of time. This is having a
small impact as well. As you can see, I'm
trying to wrap up now, both my examination of the monetary policy and
the fiscal policy in real time is linked
to the conclusion that evaluating the policies, thinking of counterfactuals, counterfactuals in this case
being no stimulus packages, are not having that big of an effect and
therefore evaluating. That's the evaluation
that I come to. I want to just
conclude going back to my ultimate theme
here and that is, what about this whole idea of policy evaluation
in real time? What I think this
is trying to show, and I don't want to say
that my answers are definitive or the last word, well I want to
convince you is that this is the thing that we should be doing in terms of evaluating monetary
policy and fiscal policy. Unfortunately, it has to
be done in real time. Our hope is that by
doing the analysis, it will affect the
policies themselves, and [inaudible] question, these are fast-moving events,
unprecedented responses. The things I described
with respect to monetary policy, unprecedented, the fiscal policy responses
size of these packages, unprecedented, completely new. I think from the
point of view of the way policy
gets talked about, you've got this
24-hour new cycle, you've got the blogs,
terrific things. But in some sense what happens is the first idea
that comes out of somebody's back of the
envelope calculation, if you like, sometimes that's
the best one in the end, but not where I would end, becomes the word, spreads around and that becomes
what's happened. That's not what we'd like to do in research as economists, we like to have a better, more thorough, careful
analysis with the best data. That's what I think we should
be trying to do as much as we can, despite its difficulty. I quite frankly
think that policy will depend on this thing. I also don't think
this is going to change with the
end of the crisis. I think the way we've
developed policies now and responses that could be used even if crisis
weren't so big, that's Federal Reserve Policies, for example, could come out. I think my experience
with this in the last two or three years is that we have a lot of data, [inaudible] actually provides
a tremendous amount of data on the financial markets
on all sorts of CDS rates. We got a lot of data coming out. A lot of it is high-frequency. Of course, we have
the capability of processing this data, which is miraculous, just getting these
graphs up like this as extraordinarily illuminary, extraordinarily helpful in
terms of understanding. I would say there's no reason to wait the long period of time, like I showed you in
my beginning slides of policy evaluation, whether it's my
work or the work of Marty and Jim I referred to
or Bernanke or whatever. It's really possible I think, and I urge people to
think of it this way. In particular, Friedman
and Schwartz, of course, analyzed the Great Depression
30 years after it was over and I don't think we need to be doing that or
should be doing that. I do think, finally conclude, that we can do a lot
better here, though. One thing, I find the
high-frequency data more and more valuable to assess what's going on and of course, we have daily data for all
sorts of financial variables where we have very little
high-frequency data for real variables, if you like. I'm going to go back
to my slides here. This period of the panic is awfully important to try
to understand what happened. There is a view
that it all started because Lehman Brothers
was not bailed out. There's other views that there was scares because of the
government's responses. It had a huge impact
around the world, like [inaudible]
showed you today. It stopped pretty
much on a dime, it's bounding back in
some other countries. What actually was
going on there? I think you need daily
data to really figure that out because the timing
is very important. Could it possibly
been Lehman Brothers? Where were it's speeches or
testimony that generated it? I think that's a task
for some institutions, not policy recommendation, but it's something
to think about. I think improved techniques,
I mentioned last, innovative ways to think about real-time
policy evaluation. I think there's a
lot of econometrics that is possible here. Finally, quite frankly,
publication is important. Sometimes it's hard to
get this work published, so I think maybe we
should establish a journal of real-time
policy evaluation. What do you think of that?
Anyway, thank you very much. 