Andrew W. Lo: Well, I want
to welcome everybody to the NBER econometric
methods lecture. My name is Andrew Lo. I'm going to be talking about Financial
Econometrics inaction, analyzing hedge funds
and systemic risk. The other econometric methods lectures in this series
have gone through a variety of techniques for various
aspects of financial analysis. What I'm going to try to do in the next two
lectures is to focus on very specific set of econometric issues that come up in dealing with hedge funds. Now, you might think
that hedge funds are relatively narrow focus. In fact, if you'll take
a look at the industry, hedge funds are a
pretty small amount of the assets under management
in the financial industry. But as I'm going to show
you in a few minutes, that's a little misleading
because hedge funds end up being far more active in
the way that they invest. While they are using a relatively
small amount of assets relative to all of the financial assets
that are out there, they use it in a
very active manner, much more so than typical, traditional
investment vehicles. They have an
inordinate amount of influence in the
financial system. For that reason, they're
worthy of study, but there'll be lots of other motivations
and I'm going to provide over the
next few minutes. The focus of my talk will
be on the following topics. I'm going to cover, first, some very basic facts
about hedge funds. I'm assuming that not all of you are familiar with what
they are, what they do. Then I'm going to turn to
some basic properties of hedge fund returns and also focus on their risks
and, in particular, the liquidity aspects
of hedge funds. That's one of the
biggest issues regarding the hedge fund industry,
is their impact, both good and bad on market liquidity. Then we'll take a break. In the second part
of this lecture, I'm going to focus on hedge
funds and systemic risk. In particular, try to
understand what role they might have played in
the past financial crisis. But more importantly, what role they will play on an
ongoing basis and how we might develop some
econometric methods for understanding the impact
on the broader economy. With that as a
basic introduction, let me begin by defining some very basic
facts about hedge funds. For each of the sections and
topics I'm going to cover, I'm going to list a few
readings at the very start, just so that you can
get your hands into the material in a somewhat
more accessible way. Much of the comments
that I'm going to be making today are based upon the research
that I've done with some students and colleagues. They've been
summarized in a book that I published last year, Hedge Funds and
Analytic Perspective. But you can get much of it from the literature
and I give you examples of it in
each of the sections. Obviously, the literature
on hedge funds is much, much larger and I will dispense with the
literature review. So I apologize in
advance if I leave out citations from anybody here. But certainly the
citations in the book and in these papers are
considerably more complete. I would urge you to take
a look at those as well. Now, I suspect that a number of you have now
heard of hedge funds, but you may not
know what they are. I have to say that there's a
lot of controversy even in the industry with regard to
how to define a hedge fund, some skeptics would argue that the term hedge fund is misleading
because what it really refers to is a
compensation scheme as opposed to a separate industry
or a set of entities. There's a bit of truth
to that in a sense that hedge funds operate
differently in terms of how they compensate
their managers from how a typical mutual funds or a long-only investment vehicles compensate their managers. In fact, that the most
cynical definition came from somebody years ago who told me what his favorite definition
of a hedge fund was. It went something like this, at the time I didn't
really appreciate it. He said that a hedge fund is a partnership with
a general partner and a set of limited partners. It's a finite partnership that has a beginning and an end. At the beginning
of the partnership the limited partners bring money to the partnership and the general partner brings experience to the partnership. At the end of the partnership, the general manager leaves with all the money and
the limited partners leave with all the experience. That's a little bit cynical. It wasn't until I understood
a little bit more about hedge funds that I finally
understood that joke. But the idea is that
hedge funds engage in a host of strategies
by the general partner, based on money that is provided
by the limited partners. Because they are unregulated
investment companies, they can engage in all sorts of risky strategies that
are unconstrained. You can think of hedge funds as mutual funds on steroids. They are very active. In fact, some would argue
that they are hyperactive in the types of trading and
strategies that they engage in. Because they are unregulated, they do have some
prohibitions as to who they can take on
as limited partners. Typically, hedge funds are not accessible to the
general public. They're not a retail product,
although that's changing. I'll tell you a little bit more about the industry later. Historically, hedge
funds cater to qualified investors and the term qualified is really a
regulatory definition. It essentially amounts to investors that have a
certain minimum level of net worth so that they
can afford to take the risks that an unregulated
entity represents. Also, hedge funds have very different fee
structures as I alluded to at the
very beginning, hedge funds typically
have a fixed fee, a fixed in terms of a
percentage of assets under management,
typically two percent. Although that varies
between one and two. Then most commonly they
have an incentive fee, typically 20 percent, although that's also variable in some cases, how much higher? In some cases a bit lower. This two and 20 structure differentiates hedge
funds from, say, typical mutual funds that only charge a percentage of
assets under management. The very first Hedge
Fund was started by a fellow by the name of
Alfred Winslow Jones in 1949. The way that the name came about was that Alfred Winslow Jones engaged in both long positions as well as short positions. The idea was that
the fund would be protected from downward
movements in the general market. It was hedged to some degree. Obviously, as we now know, hedge funds can have
various kinds of risks, not just market risk. It's a bit of a
misnomer to think of hedge funds as safer. But it is true that for
certain kinds of hedge funds, like long/short equity or equity market
neutral hedge funds, that their volatility
tends to be lower than say, the S&P 500. That's a bit of a history of
how hedge funds came to be. Over the last several years, they've really
proliferated largely because of the
ability to take on positions and leverage that really isn't accessible
to traditional vehicles. Here's a very simple
numerical example. I realized that this may be fairly straightforward
for many of you, but let me illustrate it anyway, just to define some terminology. Suppose you have a
typical mutual fund that can only engage in long positions and has a $10
million base of capital. That means that the
mutual fund can purchase $10 million of IBM. Therefore, if IBM goes
up by 10 percent, the mutual fund makes a million. If IBM goes down by 10 percent, the mutual fund loses a million. It's relatively straightforward. On the other hand, if a hedge fund has $10 million, it can engage in the following
transaction where it can purchase $30 million of IBM and simultaneously short
sell $30 million of General Electric for a total gross position of $60 million across these
various two assets. Obviously, if IBM goes up by 10 percent and General Electric
goes down by 10 percent, now all of a sudden the
hedge fund has made 60 percent of its capital. This is an illustration
of how hedge funds engage in much riskier strategies,
because, of course, if IBM goes down by 10
and GE goes up by 10, it's looking at a pretty
significant loss. It's hedged in the sense that
it's both long and short, so if you think the
S&P is going to impact both GE and IBM prices, the hedge fund will
not look as volatile. But because of both leverage
and going long and short, this particular
investment vehicle has risks that the typical
long-only investment doesn't. Now, let me tell you a little bit about
the industry and where it stands today. There are approximately
10,000 hedge funds worldwide. Most of the hedge funds are controlling in aggregate,
about $1.7 trillion. The figure is
actually a little bit higher if you include proprietary trading desks at various different
broker-dealers. This is just hedge fund assets, and the typical fee structure, as I said before,
was two and 20. They also have something
called a high watermark, which is basically a
mechanism that tries to align the interests of the hedge fund manager with
those of the investor, given a performance fee that induces convexity in the payoff structure of hedge funds. You might think that
that would induce managers to take on
more risk because, heads I win, tails you lose
with that performance fee. The idea behind the high
watermark is to say that you only get to charge
that performance fee if you are actually in positive territory with respect to my investment in your fund. If I put $100 in your fund, and for the last couple of
years, you've lost money. Now I'm only at $97 relative
to my original 100. You can't charge me
any incentive fees until and unless you
make up that $3 loss. Then at that point, you can charge incentive fees
above that high watermark. That high watermark
keeps getting set to the high water level
over the years. As the manager makes more
and more money for you, if the manager ever
loses money for you, he can't charge incentive fees until he makes up that loss. Hedge funds, for the most part, today are Registered
Investment Advisors. They registered with the SEC. That wasn't true as
of a few years ago, but as more and more
pension funds and institutional
investors have gotten interested in hedge funds, they've had to
clean up their act, become more
institutionally oriented. Now they're registered
with the SEC. The most common legal firm is a limited liability
corporation, which has many of the
benefits of a partnership but also the benefits of limited
liability corporations. The most common
financial structure is what's known as a
master-feeder structure. The idea is that
hedge funds will have a domestic feeder fund that attracts investor
assets domestically, they will have an offshore, typically a Cayman
Islands feeder fund, that will attract
foreign investors. Both of these pools of assets get funneled into a master fund, which is typically
a Delaware LP, and then the investment
manager manages that pool of assets through
a brokerage account. That's just a quick
overview about the typical structure
of a hedge fund. Let me mention that the hedge fund
industry is really a very heterogeneous industry. It's not nearly the kind
of homogeneous type of collection of companies that say the mutual
fund industry is. In fact, if you think about
the hedge fund industry from the perspective of the various different
activities that go on in it. It's really more like 20
or 30 cottage industries. To give you an example, Credit Suisse/Tremont provides indexes of that
hedge fund industry. They categorize the industry into these various
different subgroups. Hedge funds is their main
all-encompassing category, but they also have subcategories like convertible
bond, arbitrage, dedicated short
selling, distressed, emerging markets, and so on. Each of these categories have a certain amount of
heterogeneity, even within them. For example, in the
long/short equity category, which probably is the single largest category of hedge funds, those represent
funds that invest in exchange-traded equities, stocks, long and short. In that category, include both fundamental
stock pickers like Eddie Lampert, who will buy and
sell stocks based upon fundamental analysis that he and his team of analysts do. But it will also include
quantitative managers that use portfolio optimization
methods and econometrics to try to come up with long, short
equity strategies. They're very
different in nature, but they are both categorized
as long/short equity. By the way, these
categorizations don't include a number
of other types of private partnerships that
some people consider to be part of the alternative
investments industry, like private equity,
venture capital, real estate, natural
resources, and insurance. We're going to be focusing
today just on what we consider to be the
hedge fund industry. Let me start with a
little bit of motivation. Why should we care
about hedge funds? Given that they
manage $1.7 trillion? That's a relatively
small amount of money by traditional
mutual fund standards. For example, I suspect
that Fidelity, or BGI, or State Street have assets far greater than the totality of what seems to be in
the hedge fund industry. It turns out that
hedge funds are far more important though than the $1.7 trillion might
suggest for a few reasons. One is that because hedge
funds are unregulated, they engage in such a
heterogeneous collection of strategies that
during normal times, they are the tip of the
spear in that they are first to take advantage of new investment opportunities
they get created. Similarly, during bad times, they are the canary
in the coal mine. They are the first to get hit with any kind
of dislocation. The financial crisis
that we experienced over the last two or three years
started in 2007-2008, depending on your perspective. For the hedge fund industry, it began in 2005. Actually, in May of 2005, with the General
Motors downgrade, a lot of convertible
bond arbitrage managers lost tremendous amounts
of money in that month, and thereafter
dislocation, it really hit one sector or the other
of the hedge fund industry, throughout those two
years leading up to what we considered to be the start of the
financial crisis. The other reason that
hedge funds play an important role is because of leverage and illiquidity. They take on, in some cases, tremendous amounts of leverage. We've heard the
stories from LTCM and the most recent debacle with Lehman Brothers
and Bear Stearns. They take on tremendous
amounts of leverage. As a result, they have a disproportionate impact
on financial markets, far more than $1.7
trillion would suggest. Because of their investing
in illiquid assets, the potential for
financial dislocation is pretty significant as we
saw from 1998 and LTCM, but even more so recently, with the various
different kinds of strategies that
have proliferated across the entire
financial system. Finally, if you look at who's
investing in hedge funds, it used to be the
case in 1998 that hedge funds was really
a well-kept secret, that the investors were
relatively experienced, high net worth individuals,
family offices, foundations. But over the last 10 years, the kind of investors
that you have in hedge funds include
funds of funds, central banks,
insurance companies, and most importantly,
pension funds. In a minute, I'll explain
why most importantly. But this set of
investors that now make use of hedge
funds is really far broader than it's
ever been before. Now, here's a graph of the assets under management in the hedge fund
industry there, you notice that there are
two different colored bars, dark blue and light blue. The difference is
that the dark blue is the actual amount of capital, the amount of dollars in the hedge fund industry
in that given year. The light blue
includes the leverage that is provided to hedge funds by their
various counterparties. You can see that there
was a tremendous growth in hedge fund assets after 1998, which hit a peak of
close to $6 trillion by $5.5 trillion in 2007. Obviously, with the
financial crisis, that leverage was brought down
considerably and a lot of assets flowed out of the
industry but very quickly, the dislocation worked
itself through in the hedge fund industry
to the point where now the assets have built
up considerably. Actually, this is an outdated
graph as of last month, I believe we've
actually surpassed the high point of the amount of leveraged
assets in the industry. The hedge fund industry
is now back to where it was even at its peak. That also gives
you a sense of why the hedge fund industry
is so interesting. It's a lot more dynamic than the mutual fund industry in that there's
much more turnover, the speed with which
firms come into existence and go out of
existence is pretty quick. 2006 and 2007 were
years where there were unprecedented number of
hedge funds that got shut down because
of dislocation. But 2007, 2008, and 2009 were periods of unprecedented growth in the
startups of hedge funds. Lots of firms coming
in and out of the sample and that really provides lots of interesting opportunities
for economists. If you're interested in more
of an industry background, I recommend you take a look at a report that was produced in April of 2009 by a pension consulting firm
called Casey and Quirk. They produce a report that describes their perspective
on the hedge fund industry. They allocate money on behalf of their clients
to hedge funds. One of the most interesting
things that they came up with was where the assets were likely coming
from into hedge funds. They projected that asset
growth over the course of the next five years
will be fairly significant and I think that there are projections
were in fact, maybe a bit conservative because we are already at
the point where we've surpassed the levels that they had thought
would be possible. Down here in the lower
right-hand corner is a graph of the inflows of money from
various different sources. You probably can't see
it from back there but if you take a look
at the hard copy, you'll notice that the single
largest source of money into the hedge fund
industry is pension funds. Now, there's a reason for that. It's not that pension funds have any great love
for hedge funds. In fact, I suspect that there's abiding love-hate
relationship between pension funds and hedge funds. As many of you know,
pension funds are highly regulated
under ERISA and other requirements and so they have
all sorts of reporting and transparency requirements
that typical investors and hedge funds don't have. Why would they be allocating
money to hedge funds? Well, there's a very
simple reason for that, it has to do with the realities of asset
liability management. As most of you
know, pension funds after the last three years are significantly
underwater in terms of their asset
liability mismatch. Their assets are now
quite a bit lower than their liabilities,
and so they've got a lot of lost
ground to make up for. When you do an analysis of the universe of possible
investment vehicles and assets and you're
trying to advise typical pension funds
that are underwater as to how they are going to
make up for lost ground, you come up to the same answer
time and again, which is, let's put more money in the
higher yielding assets and the higher yielding assets historically has
been hedge funds. Now, I don't agree with that calculation completely
because obviously, historical data can
be quite misleading, particularly when the data
are so non-stationary. I'm going to show you
some examples of that shortly but the main
non-stationarity is that the hedge fund
industry has grown really rapidly over
the last two decades. As a result, the performance
characteristics of hedge funds even 10 years ago, may have very little
resemblance to what the performance
characteristics are likely to be over
the next ten years. If we use the past history as our only guide as to how
to make investments, we can actually be surprised that things don't
work out the way we would like them to. Unfortunately, I think
pension funds are being led down this path blindly because they are just drawn to these incredible
performance characteristics, which we're going to cover
in just a few minutes. I'm going to show you
some data that will illustrate why it is that
hedge funds just look so irresistible
to investors that are looking to make up
for some lost ground. Hedge funds are, in my view, the Galapagos Islands of
finance in the sense that they are very dynamic and you can see evolution occurring
before your very eyes. High levels of
compensation provide impetus for managers with talent and opportunity to startup hedge funds and when
that compensation goes away because of
losses and if you're below the high watermark
by a significant margin, so you can't charge incentive
fees for quite some time, hedge funds get shut down. The fact that these strategies come into and out of existence rapidly provides a really
interesting window into what's going on in
the financial industry. With that as the basic
motivation and introduction, let me now turn to some basic empirical
facts about hedge funds. I want to start by
talking about the data, what data are out there and then we're going
to look at some of the data and then we'll talk a bit about some of the
econometric techniques that are most useful for trying
to understand that data. There are a variety
of aggregate as well as individual
hedge fund data sets. Let me just describe
the most popular. From the perspective of
the aggregate indexes. Credit Suisse/Tremont has provided a time series for monthly returns of these various different
hedge fund categories going back to January of 1994. There are other vendors that provide hedge fund indexes like HFRI is another popular
set of indexes. Barkley is another set. These indexes are made up of a weighted average of
actual hedge funds. Now, these indexes are a
little bit different than the traditional indexes that you might think of like the S&P 500, in the sense that the
typical indexes that the long-only world looks at are, for the most part, investable. Meaning that if you look at
the S&P 500 for example, and you like the return streams that it seems
to be giving you, you can actually put a
billion dollars to work in the S&P 500 over the
course of the next couple of weeks and you will get the return on your
billion dollars reflected by that index. This is not true of any
existing hedge fund indices. Hedge fund indexes are a combination of these
existing hedge funds. But many of these
hedge funds are limited in the amount of
capital that can take in. In fact, some of them
are even closed. While they generate performance
numbers month-to-month, you or I could not easily put a billion dollars to work
at any one of them and still expect to get the
kind of  performance that the indexes reflect,
so that's one issue. Another issue has to do
with survivorship bias. The fact that only
the survivors are typically included in
these indexes and so you don't necessarily get the same cross sectional
representation that a broad-based index
like the S&P 500 gives you. There's also a selection bias, there's backward fill bias. There's all biases that we can talk about a
little bit later on. But I want to alert you to the fact that these
indexes are not like the traditional indexes
that we're used to seeing. The second source of data
is individual hedge funds. There are again,
several vendors that provide data for
individual hedge funds. The most popular today
seems to be TASS, that's the data set that most of the academics studying
hedge funds make use of although there are other data sets that
we've used as well, and I'll describe
those in a minute. The nice thing about the
TASS database is that it goes back to February of 1977, although the bulk of
the hedge funds in that data set didn't really
appear until the 1990s. There are few hedge funds
in the early years, but very small relative to the later hedge funds that
came into the sample. The interesting thing about
the TASS database and about all hedge fund databases is
that they are voluntary. This is an important thing to
understand about the data. Hedge funds do not need
to report to anybody. Unlike publicly listed stocks, if you list on the New
York Stock Exchange, your data goes into a database, whether you like it or not, and it goes into the database from the first time you start trading till the last day
you're listed on the exchange. There's no such database
for hedge funds. Hedge funds are not required
to report anywhere. The only reason that you see a hedge fund
in a database like TASS is because they want
to be in the database. Now why would they want
to be the database? Free advertising. This data is sold to a number of investors and the investors
pay a subscription fee so they get a sense of what investable hedge funds are out there and what their performance
characteristics are. What that means is
that there's obviously a pretty clear
self-selection bias. Now the TASS data is a
little bit better than others in the sense
that they have what's called a graveyard database. The graveyard data is
exactly what it sounds like, when you're a hedge
fund and you list in TASS and you are there
for a few years, and then you blow up
and you decide that you are gone and you shut down, that data is not erased from
the database altogether. It's moved over into
the graveyard database. The time series of returns
that existed when you were alive actually is still kept
in that graveyard data. You can analyze the returns of graveyard funds as well as live funds and you can see the degree to which
there's any bias, for example, in the
average returns. It turns out there is
a bias and the bias is around 3-400 basis points depending on which
study you look at. Now, you might think
that's a really small bias given the power of
selection here. But you also have to keep
in mind that in addition to the losers not being
in the live database, the really big winners are
also not in that database. There are hedge funds that have gotten started and have done so well that they've
never needed to advertise in these databases, in which case you
won't see them either. There's truncation
on the left tail, but there's also truncation
on the right tail. Obviously, the left tail is
thicker than the right tail. There is a little bit of downward or upward bias with this kind of selection process, but it's not nearly as
much as you might think. Let me make one final
point about the data set, which is that the other
vendors that are out there include HFRI, CISDM is a center at the
UMass Amherst and they put together a set of data that they provide to
academics without charge. Then MSCI and the Eureka
are other vendors. Now, there are overlaps among
these various data sets. But in a 2007 study by a
Bill Fung and David Hsieh, they actually did the
public service of showing the overlap across all of
these different data sets. They found at that time that
the intersection of all of these data sets was
approximately 3 percent of all of the funds. There's a lot of heterogeneity in terms of which funds
are listed in which data. When you're doing research, you just want to be
aware of that all of your conclusions have
to be caveated with this fact that what
you're looking at may not be fully
representative of the industry. Here's some more
information about the data. I won't go through, I'll let you take a
look at it on your own. But this just gives you
an idea of the number of hedge funds in the various
different data sets, how they come into and go out of the data set and this is the percentage of
assets under management represented by the different
styles of hedge funds. As I mentioned, the
long/short equity category typically tends to be a
pretty large fraction of the assets under management
representing anywhere from 30-40 percent of the assets. Now let me talk about
numbers and then we'll start doing
some econometrics. These are summary
statistics for the returns, the annualized returns of hedge funds based on
monthly data from January 1994 to February of 2009 across the indexes that Credit
Suisse/Tremont reports. For comparison at the very
bottom of this table, I've got performance numbers for traditional indexes
like the S&P 500, the Russell 3000 and so on. If you just look at
the mean column, the column of average
returns, they look fine. In some cases look good, in other cases not so good. Distressed investing
has a mean return of about 10 percent, emerging markets 7.5,
global macro, 12.4 percent. But what makes these numbers really interesting and compelling is the column
labeled SD, standard deviation. This is obviously
a typical measure risk for these funds. When you look at the risks, they tend to be much lower. In some cases, less than half of the volatility
of the S&P 500. When you take a look
at the ratio of mean to standard deviation, that's a bastardized
Sharpe ratio. In the hedge fund industry, they often assume a
risk-free rate of zero just for convenience sake. If you just take a
look at the ratio of mean to standard deviation, that Sharpe ratio with a risk-free rate
of zero shows that hedge funds actually have quite a bit better
risk-return characteristics than traditional investments. For example,
distressed investing has a Sharpe ratio
of one and a half. If you look at risk arbitrage that has
a Sharpe ratio of 1.6. Now take a look at the S&P 500, that has a Sharpe ratio of 0.4. The Russell 3000 has a
Sharpe ratio of 0.27. Hedge funds, when you look at their risk-reward
characteristics far and away, beat traditional
investments on this basis. Now, of course, we know that
this is not the only way to measure risk and so from
an academic perspective, I don't think any
of us are fooled into thinking that this
is a great investment. But think about a
pension plan sponsor that's trying to decide between allocating more money to the S&P 500 or the Russell 3000, or the JPMorgan bond index, or to hedge funds. They're going to be
drawn to hedge funds and maybe they won't allocate
a lot initially, but they will allocate more
than they have in the past. My guess is that over the
course of the next five years, we're going to probably
see an additional five to 10 percent of total pension fund assets
allocated to hedge funds. Five to 10 percent of
pension fund assets is huge and that will just
overwhelm the industry. There's going to be some
significant developments to come because of
these basic numbers. That's one of the
reasons frankly, why doing proper econometrics is so critical at
this point in time. I just want to say a
few more words about the Sharpe ratio because here we get to do
a little bit of econometrics and point out an interesting feature
of hedge fund returns. The basic idea behind Sharpe
ratios and all of you know, is take the mean, subtract the risk-free rate, divide by the
standard deviation. Then if it's a monthly number, we typically quote Sharpe ratios annually so you have
to annualize and you multiply by the
square root of 12, assuming IID returns. The typical Sharpe ratio
for hedge funds ranges from 0.25.1 to 1.0 if they're
relatively liquid. If they're illiquid,
it turns out that their Sharpe ratios
can actually be quite a bit higher from 0.5
to 1.5 and so this really compares quite favorably to traditional
investments. But that's only because
Sharpe ratio is not a sufficient statistic for measuring the myriad
kinds of risks. Now, the point that I made before about pension
funds getting attracted, the Sharpe ratios, I think, is highlighted by this
little illustration. High Sharpe ratios are
extraordinarily difficult to resist from the
investor's perspective because it looks like you're getting something for nothing. You're getting higher
return and lower risk. Who wouldn't want that? It's useful for us to
spend a little bit of time exploring the econometrics of Sharpe ratios and just
ask the question, why do you get high
Sharpe ratios? Why are some strategies higher
Sharpe ratio than others? While there are a number of reasons that one
can come up with, particularly from the underlying economic
theory perspective there are two that I think
worth focusing on for now. One is high-frequency trading, also known as market-making, and second is illiquidity. Now the third reason is you've got really
good information, maybe too good and it turns
out that high Sharpe ratios can actually be an indicator for insider trading and also fraud. I'll talk a bit about
that in a few minutes. But I want to focus
on the first two, high-frequency trading
and illiquid securities. High-frequency trading
is a common buzzword in today's regulatory debate. Because as we saw
from last month, the so-called Flash
Crash of May 6th, there are real problems
when trading happens at a pace faster than the regulations were
designed to accommodate. But in particular,
high-frequency trading has a very different
risk-reward characteristic than traditional investments. In particular, it ends up being extraordinarily attractive from the risk-reward
perspective, at least on the surface of it. Because the kinds of
risks that affect market-making are what we call tail risk or
the black swan, or picking up nickels and dimes in front of steam rollers. Most of the time, it's profitable and every once in
a while you get squashed. Market-making has that
characteristic to it. Strategies that are like
that, look very profitable. They look very consistent. Low volatility, high expected return until in the
parlance of Wall Street, you get your face ripped off. Every once in a while
you get whacked. I'll give you an
example of that, that I think is interesting
and instructive one, so you can see how this works. Suppose that you've
got a strategy where every single day you either make or lose half
a percent on your capital. It's a coin toss, 0.5 percent is your
profit or your loss. Let's suppose that
the probability of winning is 58 percent, the probability of
losing is 42 percent. It's close to 50-50, but not that close so
that your expected return per day is 8/100 of one percent. It's got a lot of volatility
too because you're going up or down by 50 basis points, where your mean is
eight basis points. It's got a lot of risk. Suppose the risk-free rate
is one percent per year, which is about what
it is right now, and suppose that
you've got 250 days of independent trials of this particular
investment opportunity. Well, if you just calculate the theoretical Sharpe Ratio of this strategy on
an annual basis, what you get is that this
has a Sharpe ratio of 2.2. It's an incredibly
attractive strategy because you're essentially engaging in time
diversification. You've got a lot of
independent trials and each trial is profitable
by a small margin. You're making nickels
and dimes most of the time and when
you put it together, it looks really great. The problem with these
kinds of strategies is, I've left out the fact
that more often than not, you are taking other
kinds of risks that you don t know about,
particularly liquidity shock. For example, a New York
Stock Exchange specialist will be making profits
like this on most days. But every once in a while, like October 19th, 1987, you get wiped out because
the market is all going one way and you are not making nickels and dimes on that day. If you have to make markets when everybody is
going against you, there's a huge adverse selection effect
and you will lose. The risk profile is potentially misleading because you're using mean and variance
as if they were sufficient statistics for risk
when in fact they're not. Just as a small aside, how do you conduct
inference on Sharpe ratios? Here's when we get to do a
little bit of econometrics. If you assume that
the returns are independently and
identically distributed, then it turns out that you can work out the asymptotic
distribution of the Sharpe ratio very easily using first-order
Taylor approximation. Here's the distribution
of the Sharpe ratio, the standard error
looks like this, it doesn't look nearly as messy as this equation
would have you believe, it's actually just
equal to one plus 1.5, the true Sharpe ratio squared. That means that when you
estimate a Sharpe ratio, you should always calculate
a standard error. And under the null hypothesis, it's relatively easy
to calculate that, which is given by right here. If you don't know what
the true Sharpe Ratio is, you can assume it's
zero and under the assumption of no
performance ability whatsoever, you can calculate
the standard error. If you want to assume a
little bit of performance, you can obviously
make that adjustment. What's more subtle is how we annualize the Sharpe ratio if we calculate it from
daily or monthly data. Because the IID assumption
tells us just take the square root of the
number of periods and multiply and that's
how you annualize. But what if the
data are not IID? For most asset returns
that we deal with, like stocks, futures, the serial correlation
is pretty small, but it turns out that
for hedge funds, serial correlation is
actually not so small. It actually matters how you
annualize the Sharpe ratio. Now, if you don't assume Id, it turns out that you
can still develop a set of asymptotic results, but you have to do a
little bit more work, you have to rely on estimators like the
generalized method of moments. In particular, you can extend these inference results very easily to stationary and
ergodic returns, in which case, you can get the
asymptotic distribution using this very
simple GMM framework, and the way you estimate it using any number
of estimators, including the
Newey-West estimator for the variance
covariance matrix. But the interesting thing about this analysis is
that for stationary and ergodic returns, it also gives you
a different way of annualizing Sharpe ratios. In particular, if
you're looking at the returns aggregated
across q periods, so if you're looking at the variance of q period return, you can actually show that the variance of q
period return is just equal to the sum of all
the possible covariances, and when you work
out the analytics, you get that the Sharpe
Ratio of q period return is a factor Eta times the Sharpe ratio of the
single period return. This Eta factor, it
looks like this, it's a function of the number of periods, obviously, in
the aggregation interval, but it's also a function of the auto-correlation
coefficients. If nothing is autocorrelated, if your returns are IID, then this Eta q just turns out to be
the square root of q, that's what we said
before, square root of 12. But if you've got
any autocorrelation, then taking the square root is not the right thing to do, you have to take into account
the serial correlation. It turns out that for the strategies that are
the most attractive, the ones that have the
highest Sharpe ratios, those are the ones
that actually have the highest serial
correlation too. In fact, we're going to
see in a minute that there's a very
tight relationship between serial correlation and illiquidity among certain kinds of hedge fund strategies. Anyway, that's just
an econometric aside to illustrate how you might take into account these effects. We're going to
come back and talk about why these effects
are so important. Let me just show you some
data to that effect. This is a set of
summary statistics for individual mutual funds
and individual hedge funds. You'll notice that the
mutual funds have names on them because I obtain
them from public sources, but the hedge funds do not
have any names on them because hedge funds are
notoriously press shy, and moreover, a hedge
fund managers are generally very well-funded
and litigious, so they have no qualms
about suing people that say certain things
about them in the press. So, that's why the
names have been removed so as to reduce the
possibility of lawsuits. What I want you to focus on
here is the column label, Rho sub 1, that's just the first-order
autocorrelation of the monthly returns
of these funds. You'll notice that
for the mutual funds, the autocorrelations
are all pretty low. In fact, the highest number
there for the mutual funds is 12.4 percent for the
Fidelity Magellan Fund, the lowest number is minus 4 percent for the
Vanguard 500 Index Trust. There's very little
serial correlation among mutual fund
monthly returns. Then the last column, you have a p-value for the Box Pierce
Q statistic that tests for the statistical significance of the first 12 autocorrelations. The smallest p-value
is 13 percent, so no statistical significance in autocorrelation among
any of the mutual funds. Now look at the hedge funds. The Hedge funds, most of their p-values are well
below five percent. For example, the
very first fund, the convertible arbitrage fund, the autocorrelation of
the monthly returns is 42.7 percent, that is a ridiculous
monthly autocorrelation, that's a huge amount
of predictability in terms of its prior
month's return. Now we're gonna have to talk
about that because that's a problem from the perspective
of efficient markets, the random walk hypothesis, it shouldn't be
there, but it is. At first when my coauthors
and I looked at this data, we were sure we had
a programming error, so we had to go back
and redo it three or four times before we were actually convinced that
these numbers were correct, they are correct. If you take a look at
mortgage-backed securities, that's got an autocorrelation
of 42 percent. You look at high yield
debt, 33.7 percent. Now, if you look at
risk arbitrage fund A, that's got an autocorrelation
of minus 4.9. Risk arbitrage B, same thing, minus 4.9. But, convertible
arbitrage a is 33.8. It's all over the map, there's
a lot of heterogeneity. The question is, is
there any logic to that? Is there any reason
why some funds have really high autocorrelation
and others don't. That's a puzzle that we need to grapple
with and we'll have to start developing
a little bit of econometrics there,
I'll come back to that. I want to make one
other point about the data, which is correlations. Hedge funds are attractive not just because
of their returns, not just because of
their Sharpe ratios, but because they have very attractive
diversification benefits. In particular, if you look
at the correlation of these hedge fund indexes with traditional indexes
like the S&P 500, generally the
correlations are no more than 50 or 60 percent, and in some cases they're
actually quite a bit lower. For example, the
correlation of say, equity market neutral
with the S&P 500, that's only 25 percent. In fact, the correlation of managed futures with the S&P
500 is minus 14 percent. If you remember from your
basic portfolio theory, when you've got
something that's got low or even negative
correlation that's really attractive from reducing your risk/reward profile, benefiting your mean-variance
efficient frontier. The correlations
are very important, but, something has
been happening to the correlations over time. Let me show you a
simple example of that. Here's a graph of the correlations among the hedge fund
indexes themselves, so not with the S&P 500, but convertible arbitrage with equity market neutral
with managed futures. What I've done in this
graph is to calculate the correlation matrix for the Credit
Suisse/Tremont indexes over a 60-month rolling window. Within each 60-month
rolling window, when I have that
correlation matrix, I'll take the absolute values of those correlations and
average them and plot it. This graph with the, the blue line is the average, the red line is the median, as opposed to the mean of
those absolute correlations. You can see that the mean
absolute correlation, for the most part
in the '90s and the early 2000s was in
the 42 percent range, and then there was
a big jump down. Then since 2004, it's been creeping
up, up and up. Now what's going on? First of all, that one jump down can be explained by
one single data point. and the data point is, of course, August 1998, LTCM. Let me show you what
happens to this graph when you take out August 1998. When you take it out, the correlation goes way down. So what happened
was August 1998, lots of hedge fund strategy
is lost money that created correlation
in the estimators. If you leave that data in, you get unusually high amount of cross-correlation
until August 1998 drops out of that
rolling window. The fact is that
hedge funds have an average correlation among themselves of around 35 percent. But over time that
correlation has continued to creep up, largely because money has
poured into the space and therefore our hedge funds
are running into each other in terms of the strategies
that they're deploying, and financial market
linkages have become tighter and
tighter over time. With that correlation
caveat in mind, let me now turn to the first aspect of hedge fund performance
that I want to focus on, which is their returns,
hedge fund returns. For this, I'm going
to refer you to an article by Ackermann,
McEnally, and Ravenscraft, as well as a piece that I did on
Where Do Alphas Come From. I want to explain a little
bit about how to think about hedge fund returns. This is loosely related to the investment
performance literature, but only loosely related
in the sense that we use a very different metric than the traditional ones
that have been proposed. First let me show you
what performance is. This is the Credit
Suisse/Tremont Hedge Fund Index, the cumulative returns
starting December of 1993. All of these various
different indexes are normalized to be equal to
one at that same date. You can take a look at this
graph to see how all of these various different
asset classes performed. The really super-duper
wild swing for this light blue
graph, that is oil. If we put oil aside, because there was a bit
of a roller coaster ride, as we know from the
last few years, the best-performing of all
of these asset classes is hands down the
hedge fund industry. Now there are a lot of
problems with that index, as I mentioned earlier. But nevertheless, on paper at the hedge fund
industry looks like it's performed incredibly well relative to a lot of
these other asset classes, including stocks,
bonds, currencies, commodities, and so on. The question is, why? How do hedge funds
do what they do? This goes to a
broader question of what do we mean by
active management? Typically, when we think
of active management from the traditional portfolio
management perspective, we're talking about
excess performance above and beyond some benchmark. Active bets in that
framework means departures from that
particular benchmark, benchmark weights. Benchmarks are
considered passive, they're easy to achieve, they are very little skill
involved at that low fees. A traditional measure of active management is
the information ratio. This is used more often by industry folks
than by academics. It's basically a measure
of your Alpha per unit tracking error
or excess risk. The idea is that you've got
some benchmark and you're taking some additional risk above and beyond that benchmark, that's your active risk. What you want to
do is to measure the extra expected return that you're getting per unit of that extra risk you're
taking above and beyond the benchmark with the idea that if you're a
pension plan sponsor, you could be getting the
benchmark return instead of giving your money to
this active manager and paying active fees. However, what if there are other systematic
factors going on? What if it's the
case that as with the APT or Merton's
Intertemporal CAPM, there are additional
risk factors that generate
additional risk premia. You're not measuring
it, so therefore, those risk premia are
lumped into your Alpha and the variability of
those extra factors are now lumped into
your residual variance. Then, how do you think
about excess return? We have a situation where your Alpha could be risk
factors and so you're attributing to performance when, in fact, should be
attributed to risk. It's really difficult
to try to understand how you think about a
hedge fund's performance. Because a hedge fund is taking on lots of different
kinds of risks. Not just equity market risk, the currency risk, interest
rate risk, liquidity risk. What we really want
to ask is where do Alphas come from
for a hedge fund? It's a different question in certain respects than for traditional investment vehicles. Let me propose a very
simple idea that really strips down the basics of what we mean by
investment acumen. If we think to all of the various different
investors that we respect and admire
and we ask the question, why do we respect
and admire them? Well, obviously they make money. They have market wisdom. But how do we know they
have market wisdom? For example, Warren Buffett is often lauded as
this market wizard. The reason that we have so much respect for him
is because he makes certain bets and moves his portfolio allocation around in order to accommodate
those bets. Then those bets turn
out to be correct. That same set of skills apply to any successful investor no matter what the time horizon is. I used to think
that Warren Buffett was different from say, a high-frequency trader
like Stephen Cohen. Stephen Cohen for those of
you who haven't heard of him, is a legendary day
trader who came out of a broker-dealer named grantee to start SAC Capital. The amount of money
he's generated for his investors is in the hundreds of billions
of dollars at this stage. He makes money like nobody else does on a daily basis intraday. He trades and is responsible for some ungodly fraction of the New York Stock
Exchange volume. He doesn't do it quantitatively, although now his firm
SAC Capital employees, both quantitative managers as well as fundamental analysts. But he himself is
literally a screen trader. He will look at the
screen 9:30 to 4 o'clock and trade all day. That's all he does. He looks at the prices,
picks up the phone, calls people gets information, trades, and is
incredibly profitable. At first, I thought that Steve Cohen and
Warren Buffett where two different animals because Warren Buffett obviously
is no day trader. He trades once or
twice a year if that. But it turns out
that in both cases they have a common denominator. The common denominator is this, they make a decision with regards to their
portfolio weights. Subsequently, that decision
turns out to be successful. That is, the stocks that
they buy tend to go up, the stocks that they
sell tend to go down. It's pretty much
as simple as that. That suggests that investments
skill can be measured in terms of the degree to which your decisions lead
to good outcomes. It has to do with the
relationship between your portfolio weight changes and ultimately the returns
to your portfolio. Let me be a little
bit more specific. I'm going to argue
that active management consists of time-varying
portfolio weights, where the time variation depends upon information,
and in particular, using my discrete time notation, portfolio weights at
time t depends upon information at time t minus 1. In other words, you
can't look ahead into the future when you decide
to trade at time t, you're using
information up to and including only that as available as a time t, so I
write that as X_t minus 1, following the standard
conventions of our literature. The question about
active management is, how good is your information, X_t minus 1 in giving you
portfolio weights Omega_t, that ultimately turn
out to be successful? That is, generate returns
that are positive. That's it. All we need to do is to ask
the question whether or not these portfolio weights
lead to good outcomes. Let me show you what I mean. This is a standard
definition of covariance. I'm going to just use a
different form of it. The expectation of the
product is equal to the covariance plus the
product of the expectations. Standard identity. Now, let's take a look at
this very simple expression. I'm going to take a
look at the product of two variables, X_t, Y_t, and I'm going to sum them
over t and divide by t. This is a sample
counterpart to this. What I want to show is that the sample counterpart behaves identically to the
population counterpart to this covariance relation. I'm going to use that
in a very simple way in just a minute to decompose returns.
Let's do this. The return on my
portfolio at time t is simply equal to the
weights at time t, which we're determined using information prior to time t, multiplied by the
returns at time t, which I did not know at time t. Obviously, these are returns between time t and t plus 1. The expected return on my portfolio is simply
equal to the sum of the expected returns of
these individual terms in each of my positions
of my portfolio. But this is the
expectation of a product. Using my previous identity, I can always write the
expectation of a product as the covariance plus the
product of expectations. That means that
this expectation of the product is given by this, the covariance between the
weights and the returns, and the expectation of the weights times the
expectation of the returns, or it's equal to this. This bottom line is in my view a summary of active versus passive
portfolio management. What this is saying is
that your expected return, the sum total of what
you expect to earn, is going to come
from two pieces. One piece is the average
portfolio weights that you're going to hold multiplied by the average return
on those assets. Plus, it's going
to be augmented by any covariance
between your weights and the subsequent returns. Now, look at this covariance. This covariance is interesting because it's a function
of information at time t minus 1 covarying with the returns at time t. Effectively, what
this is measuring is your ability to come up
with good portfolio weights at time t minus 1 that
subsequently turn out to yield positive
returns the next period. In effect, it's a
measure of how good you are at forecasting
those returns. Let's take an example. Suppose that you form
your weights randomly. Well, clearly, in that case, the covariance
between your weights and the returns is zero. If you're forming
weights randomly, then your expected return is
going to really come from the average level of those weights and the
average risk premium, or alternatively, suppose you
never changed the weights. Suppose the weights are fixed. Then clearly the
covariance is zero. You don't have any
ability to forecast. You're not trying to forecast
and so the only source of your profitability is
the second component. The degree to which you are able to forecast future returns
using your information, that's going to lead
directly to profitability. We now have a measure of active versus passive
for hedge funds. This is particularly
relevant for hedge funds because there's
no benchmark going on. We're not looking at active weights versus passive weights, we're looking at
something much more elemental, much more basic, which is, you make a
decision at time t minus 1. How did it turn out next period? If the covariance is positive, you're going to add to
your expected return. If the covariance is negative, you're going to subtract
from that return. This really provides
a measure for looking at active
versus passive and here I've just rewritten
it using correlations of weights versus
returns as well as standard deviations and the bottom line is that it allows us to decompose expected
returns into these two pieces. Now, this seems so simple that when I
first came upon it, I was shocked and I was surprised that nobody
else had come up with it. In the literature,
there are papers that touch upon this
to varying degrees. Grinblatt and Titman
have a paper that talks about this and I cite
that in our paper. But they don't really
focus on it as a measure of active versus
passive investments. It dawned on me as to why
it is that in the past, financial economists
haven't really focused on correlations between
weights and returns. The reason is that
for the most part, financial economists are
not really econometricians. They're actually
focusing more on theory and in particular
on portfolio optimization. What do we do in
portfolio optimization? We try to pick weights
that yield good outcomes. In other words, we're
thinking about Omega not as random
variables that have statistical properties but we're thinking about the weights as choice variables that
need to be optimized. When you take the
expectation of the returns, most of you, I suspect if I hadn't written this
down in this way, you would have taken
the Omega out of the expectation
and you would have had the expected
return is equal to the sum of Omega i times Mu i. That's the standard equation
that we all start with when we start doing
mean-variance optimization. But when you think about
how hedge fund managers behave and the
information that they use and you look at it from an econometrician's
point of view or I've got portfolio weights here, I've got returns here. Now I'm looking
at their product. Well, in fact, they are
statistical measures that add to our understanding
of active versus passive. You can instruct a simple ratio. The active ratio is
simply the ratio of the covariance piece divided
by the total return and the interesting thing about this is that you can
actually estimate this without ever having
to compute a covariance. Because of the identity
that I showed you before between the covariance
and the expected returns, you can actually estimate this active ratio
by taking 1 minus the ratio of the
passive component divided by the total return. The reason this is important
is that hedge funds will almost never want to
give you weights. They won't give you positions. But if you ask them to tell you over the last
year on average, were you long or short equities, were you long or short JGBs, were you long or
short gold and if so, what was your average portfolio
weight over that period? They'll possibly give you that. Once they give you that, you actually have enough to estimate how much
of their return is due to active choices
versus passive choices. There are all sorts of
things that you can do with this obviously
once you have the information but I want to illustrate to you just a few
examples, because I think while it makes
perfect sense from the perspective of
the decomposition, you should see it in action to get some intuition about it. Here's a very simple
example that just goes to the heart of
active versus passive. Suppose you've got a very simple asset
allocation strategy between asset 1 and asset 2. Let's suppose that
asset 1 and asset 2 have returns that
look like this. Asset 1 has a return that
looks like one percent, two percent, one percent, two percent, one percent. It basically just flips back and forth between one
and two percent. Asset 2 is a risk-free rate that is 15 basis
points per month. Now, suppose that you engage in a very simple strategy where your portfolio
weights look like this. The blue bar is that you're
75 percent in asset 1, 25 percent in asset 2. You basically are holding that and the weights
are constant. In this simple example, when you calculate
the active ratio, obviously the active
ratio is zero. None of the return is due to any timing because
you're not moving the weights and the
covariance between the weights and the
returns is zero. What about in this case?
Now, look at this. Your weights are low when the returns are low
and your weights are high when the
returns are high. Now you've got some ability to forecast when returns
are high and low. In this case, you can see that the active ratio is
actually positive. It's not 100 percent because a fair amount of your return happens to be coming from
the fact that both of these assets are yielding
positive return. The fact is that there's
a passive strategy where you hold a constant portfolio will still generate
something for you, but the active ratio
will tell you what the incremental value
is of your covariance. Finally, if you do the
exact wrong thing, if you increase your portfolio
when the returns are low and you decrease the portfolio when the returns are high, your active ratio is
actually negative. You're actually doing
worse than nothing at all. You can do a more sophisticated
example where if you have some kind of a market timing strategy with an AR(1), so if the market is an AR(1) and you actually can time it, you can show that this strategy has a
positive active ratio. You can actually calculate
it analytically. In a case where we simulated a statistical
arbitrage strategy, you can actually show
that the active ratio separates out the active
component from the passive. I want to say one
last thing about this active ratio
before we move on, which is that Warren
Buffett versus Steve Cohen is a very
important distinction because, as I said, they do things very differently, and yet I want to
believe that there are some common element to both
of their investment talents. The answer to whether or not there's any commonality
has to do with the fact that you have to focus on the sampling interval. It turns out that Warren
Buffett is making decisions all the time as well. It's just that his decisions
most of the time is buy, buy, buy, buy, buy, buy, buy, whereas Steve
Cohen is buy, sell, buy some more, sell more, sell less by more buy, sell. They both are making decisions, but they have different
time series patterns because the underlying
investments are different. It turns out that the
way to look at it is the different
sampling intervals are giving you
different results. Here's an example where
your portfolio weights are changing as a function
of your sampling interval. But in Warren Buffett's case, your portfolio
weights may not be changing across a long
sampling interval. That's okay, you'll still get an accurate estimator
of what he's doing, even though the weights
don't change as much and the problem comes if your sampling
interval is two course. If you're measuring
Steve Cohen's portfolio on a monthly basis, but he's making
decisions every day, you could actually
be missing out on a lot of what his
investment talent is. The one subtlety that
you have to worry about is your active management
has to be aligned. You have to have the
sampling interval at least as fine as the decision-making intervals of the individuals that
are being analyzed. There are some more examples
as I said in the text. Let me now skip to the empirical analysis where we look at the contrary
and trading strategy, we do the decomposition. I'll leave you to
take a look at that. Let me make one final comment, which is when you extend the framework to having
multiple factors driving your expected returns and
you now want to incorporate traditional investment
management type of performance attribution, you can do that pretty easily with the active
ratio and you get a very interesting contrast
to the traditional measures. Once you introduce
these factors and you multiply out for
the portfolio weights, you can show that performance comes from three
different components. One is security
selection, Alpha. The second is your factor
exposures, your Betas. But the third, which people
haven't talked about as much is what I
call factor timing. That is, is it the case that when you change your
portfolio weights, the portfolio weights you pick when multiplied
by the Betas, are actually going
to be beneficial in terms of what those
factor exposures are. To be clear, as an example, Steve Cohen has been
known to flip the Beta of his portfolio from positive
to negative overnight, which is a pretty remarkable
achievement given that at the time that
I heard about this, he was managing a $5
billion portfolio. To go from a positive
to a negative Beta with $5 billion overnight that takes a lot of skill
and a lot of guts. But the point is that
if you want to know whether that's a good
thing or a bad thing for a hedge fund manager, the question to ask is, how good are your
portfolio weighted Betas relative to the subsequent performance
of those factors? Is it the case that
you flipped to a negative Beta when
the risk premium turns negative and you flip to a positive Beta when the
risk premium is positive? If so, you've got skill. That's a covariance measure between your weights
and the Betas. The active ratio
applies just as well. But it applies now between the covariances of those
asset weighted Betas, the weights times the
Betas, and the factors so that the expected returns are the sum of three components, risk premia, security
selection, and factor timing. Let me summarize by saying that this framework allows you to decompose hedge fund returns
into active management, which involves changing weights, you're making
decisions, active bets. This allows us to come up with a concrete measure
of those active bets, namely the correlation between weights and subsequent returns. It does provide a
somewhat new definition for active and passive. It's not just your weights as a function of the benchmark, but rather the correlation of those benchmark departures
with subsequent returns. It provides a measure for a performance attribution
that could give you information somewhat different from traditional measures. It may well be that this measure doesn't add a whole lot for traditional
investments simply because traditional
managers like mutual fund managers and loan only managers are highly constrained in how much they
can vary their weights. But for absolute
return investors, this could actually be
a very useful measure. In my view, this is the single
most compelling argument for why it is that
you would like to have a hedge fund manager
actually give you information about
his or her weights. Up until now, most investors who asked for weights
wouldn't know what to do with them because there's a lot of them and they
move around a lot. But this is one example where once they give
you the weights or at least the average
values over a period of time, you can actually see how much of the manager's return is being generated by changes in
those weights versus simply holding onto risky
high premium assets. This brings me to my next topic, which I'm going to just
start talking about for a few minutes
and then maybe we'll take the break at three o'clock and then we
can reconvene at 3: 30. The idea behind the
hedge fund manager earning premia by holding onto certain risky
assets is something that investors have been
suspicious about for years. The notion of hedge fund Beta is a real controversial
subject because of course, hedge funds charge pretty
high fees and investors do not want to be
paying 220 for Beta, they can get Beta on their own. If hedge funds are generating returns from Beta, we
want to know about it. Question is, what kind
of Beta might that be? What I want to propose is that one of the most
significant kinds of Beta, which actually may
not be so easy for individual investors
to get on their own, is illiquidity of hedge funds. That generates a
risk premium that most of the time has a
positive expected return. But every once in a
while you get your face ripped off as we did in 2008. I want to talk about how we go about measuring illiquidity. Now, to give you an idea of hedge fund Betas
being irrelevant, I start with a very
simple illustration. Take a look at a
long/short equity fund and ask yourself the question, what are the biggest
risk factors that affect long/short equity? Well, market Beta, industry sector
exposure, value growth, stock loan considerations,
execution costs. Those are the things that a long/short equity
manager would worry about. Now, think about a fixed income arbitrage fund like LTCM. What would they care about? Yield curve exposure,
credit exposure, liquidity exposure, leverage
constraints, macro factors. What's interesting about this
comparison is that there's virtually no overlap
between these two funds. What this suggests is
that the kinds of risks that these funds exhibit
can be very different. In particular, as we know, they exhibit so-called
phase-locking regimes where there are periods where all of these funds tend to
be highly correlated, typically when they're losing money and that there are
nonlinearities in how quickly they move and
how fast they recover. Let me give you a very
simple example of motivating the need for better risk models
for hedge funds. Correlation is typically
what we use to measure these risks
across these funds. I want to show you a
simple calculation where you will have a very straightforward risk
model for hedge fund returns that has a common factor
and you can think of the factor Lambda
as the S&P 500. But you also have a component
that is a tail risk. This is a factor that has
a common exposure, z. Z is normally distributed with some negative mean and a pretty big variance
so it's a big shock. But z doesn't get switched
on, except very rarely. There's an indicator variable that's zero most of the time, p is pretty high, but with small probability
it gets switched on. But when it does, it overwhelms the variability of returns. If you have a simple model like this and you ask the question, what is the correlation between two hedge funds that
have this profile? What you see is that obviously when the
event does not occur, the correlation
is close to zero. When the event does occur, the correlation
can be very high, particularly if the variance
of the z-component is high. But what's frustrating is that if you calculate the
unconditional correlation, so you don't know what
regime you're in. Whether I is equal to 0 or 1. When you calculate the
unconditional correlation and you assume that say the probability
of a bad event is one-tenth of one percent. But when it does occur
the volatility of z is 10 times the
volatility normally. It turns out that the
unconditional correlation is basically one percent. There's virtually no
correlation unconditionally, despite the fact
that when events happen they're almost
perfectly correlated. This suggests that we need something a little
bit more subtle. Using a two-state regime switching model can
actually capture that. This is a simple Hamilton
Markov switching model. One of the things that
you'll notice when you apply this to the data is that it has a really interesting fit for some of these
hedge fund indexes, but for others, if the maximum likelihood
algorithm won't converge. For example, for
dedicated short-selling, for risk arbitrage, for managed futures using a two-state regime-switching
model just doesn't work, but for all of the
others, it does. It has a very
interesting profile. Let's for example, take
fixed income arbitrage. The fixed income arbitrage regime switching
parameters says that, you've got two different
states for the mean, one where the mean is positive and the other where
it's negative. You've got two different
states for the variability, one where the variability is about two percent and the other where the
variability is triple. This gives you a sense of the differences
in nonlinearities with that particular strategy. Most of the time, it's actually doing
reasonably well. It's got a high
mean, nine percent, low standard deviation,
two percent. If you take a look at
that Sharpe ratio, you're getting a Sharpe
ratio of close to 4.2 in the good state. In the bad state, you get a negative Sharpe ratio that looks pretty unattractive. This is one example,
one illustration of how nonlinearities can characterize
hedge fund returns. By the way, this
regime switching model has a very interesting
ability to pick out, not just August 1998, but you see back in May of 1998 that the color-coding tells
you you're in a bad regime. There were definitely
early warning signs in terms of a regime
shifting model of the dislocation that
ultimately occurred with fixed income arbitrage
in August of 1998. There are a bunch
of other ones that I'll let you take a look at. But the regime
switching is really quite an interesting model. For managed futures,
it's a horrible model, it doesn't work at all. Here's an example of managed futures returns
and the color-coding. Everything looks red because it always looks like
this regime shifting, but you can't identify
what they are. What that's telling you is that the algorithm really hasn't converged the parameter
estimates are unreliable. It turns out that
if you aggregate these regime-shifting
probabilities, you can actually get some
indication of systemic risk, but that's just a bit of a
preview that I'm going to come back to a
little bit later on. Let me conclude this part of the lecture by saying
that when we come back, I'm going to start talking about liquidity measures and how this autocorrelation
that we detected in returns in the previous
table actually is going to be a very useful litmus test for the kind of
illiquidity exposure that we'll see in these hedge funds and how we can use that to ultimately capture aspects of systemic
risks that really were visible several years
before the crisis hit. I want to continue with a
discussion of illiquidity. We saw from the
previous tables that hedge fund returns have a peculiar characteristic
in that many of them have very high
serial correlation. It turns out that serial
correlation is going to be a key characteristic
of illiquidity, at least among
hedge fund returns. Now, it's obviously difficult to talk about liquidity
in the abstract. As many people have said, liquidity is very much like pornography in the sense
that it's hard to define, but you know it when you see it. The reason that it's hard
to define is because liquidity really has three
distinct characteristics. In my view, something
is liquid if, you can sell it quickly, if you can sell
large amounts of it and when you sell it, you don't move the
price by very much. That suggests that liquidity has these three-dimensions of price, time, and size that are not always that easy to quantify. Now we know that many
hedge funds are not liquid and there are two senses in which
they're not liquid. One is that many hedge funds impose liquidity constraints
on their investors. For example, you can't put money in at any point in time, typically there's
a period of time monthly where you can subscribe. More importantly, you can't take money out anytime you want. There are often constraints on when you can pull
your money out. Typically, investors
are expected to leave their money in
for at least one year. There's a one-year lock up. When you do withdraw, you typically are required
to give 60 days' notice, or in some cases longer. There are other hedge funds that impose what are called gates, meaning that when
more than 25 percent of the assets are
looking to be redeemed, they have the right to
impose gates that say, no, you cannot withdraw,
we will liquidate in an orderly fashion over a much longer period
of time in that case. The second reason that liquidity affects hedge
funds is because of the underlying assets that
many hedge funds invest in. Those in hedge funds
that invest in say, emerging market debt or real estate or natural
resources like timber, they cannot liquidate those
holdings very rapidly. Frankly, that's one of
the reasons why they impose these liquidity
constraints on their investors. It turns out that a
simple proxy for both of these aspects of illiquidity
is serial correlation. Then give you an
example of this. Let's take a look at
those monthly indexes that I showed you before. But now compare them
to indexes that are more familiar to us from the traditional
investment world. In this table, you see the autocorrelations
row 1, row 2, row 3 of the standard
equity and bond indexes Ibbotson small stock index, long-term government
bonds, corporate bonds, large company index, and so on. The serial correlations are generally pretty
small, anywhere, ranging from minus
2.3 percent to 15 percent for the
Ibbotson Corporate Bond and small company indexes. But we see that for the
EXP, Extra Income Fund, which is a high yield debt fund, the autocorrelation
is 35 percent. Right there, it seems like
there may be some link between illiquidity
and autocorrelation. But as we saw before, when you look at the
hedge fund indexes, the autocorrelations
are really tremendous. Now these are indexes
not individual funds. But if you take a look
at the convertible bond arbitrage index for the CS treatment
family you're getting a first-order autocorrelation
of 56 percent. Even something like the fixed income
arbitrage index has an autocorrelation of
close to 40 percent. Clearly there's
something going on. Now, this is the example
that I showed you before for individual mutual
funds and hedge funds. One of the things
you'll notice from the mutual funds is that there are a few mutual funds that do have some
serial correlation. For example, the Janice
Worldwide Fund has the second highest autocorrelation
with 11.4 percent. It turns out that the
Janice Worldwide Fund, I believe it's either
that or the Janice Fund was involved in this mutual
fund market timing issue. It turns out that that
market timing issue actually can generate, it can induce spurious
serial correlation. That's another
example, stale prices, non synchronous trading, which finance people have
studied for many years, that induces serial
correlation in portfolios. There's a relationship
between that and illiquidity that I'll talk
about in just a minute. In some research
that my coauthors, Mila Getmansky and
Igor Makarov did. We tried to explain this serial correlation and hedge fund returns in a
number of different ways. We came up with five
different reasons why you might have
serial correlation. Time-varying expected returns, two, market inefficiencies, three, nonsynchronous
trading for illiquidity, five, performance smoothing. We spent a fair bit of time trying to use various
different models to explain the
serial correlation from the perspective
of one and two. We were just not
able to do that. It's very difficult
to have a model of time-varying expected
returns that's both plausible and can
generate the amount of serial correlation on
a monthly frequency. It's possible to generate serial correlation
with time-varying expected returns over the
course of quarters or years. But on a monthly basis, it's really hard to
calibrate a model that's plausible and that can generate
the numbers that we see. Inefficiencies we
think are even more unlikely because of the
nature of these investments. Hedge funds are among
the most active, aggressive, high-yielding, highly incentivized
types of investments. If anybody has an
incentive to act smart, to take advantage of Alpha
or any predictability, it's hedge fund managers. If you're getting a 40, 42 percent autocorrelation in mortgage-backed securities, you have a tremendous
incentive to increase your leverage when you
have a good return this month so as to
benefit next month. You have a tremendous
incentive to decrease your
leverage if you have a bad return this
month so that you can reduce your
losses next month. The only reason that
you don't do that as a hedge fund manager is in our view if you can't do that, if you are actually physically unable to get in and out of positions actively
because of illiquidity. Our hypothesis is that autocorrelation is a
proxy for illiquidity, as long as there are no other
institutional rigidities that prevent you from trading. If you're a mutual fund
and you literally are not allowed to trade for
specific regulatory reasons, then it may well be
that inefficiencies persist because you're not allowed to take
advantage of that. But in unregulated investment
vehicles like hedge funds, the only reason that
you're going to get autocorrelation
in our view is if you cannot take advantage of any kind of serial correlation. That's why we think illiquidity goes hand in hand
with autocorrelation. Now the third reason
that we mentioned a minute ago was smoothing. This has to do with an activity
that is in fact illegal. Investments smoothing,
performance smoothing is the simple behavior where when you do well
in a given month, you under-report your returns, and when you do poorly
in a given month, you under-report your losses. The idea is that you want
to have a smoother set of returns so that the volatility is lower and the Sharpe
ratio is higher. There are some unscrupulous
hedge fund managers that apparently engage in
this activity in order to dress up their returns. Now the reason that in our
paper and in this framework, we don't distinguish
between the two is because we can't, we can't tell whether
or not smooth returns are coming because of the underlying
illiquid nature of the assets or they're coming because managers are
being sleaze bags. But we would argue that
actually for the purposes of illiquidity identification,
it doesn't matter. In other words,
the only way that an unscrupulous sleaze
bag hedge fund manager can smooth returns effectively. The only way that you can do
that is if the assets are illiquid enough that you get the fiddle with their
market valuations. For example, if you're a
equity market neutral manager, you're trading and
exchange traded equities. Your prices for the value of your securities are determined
every second of the day. In particular, if you use your closing prices to
mark the daily returns, you don't have flexibility
in choosing the mark that you pick to establish
the value of your portfolio. If on the other hand,
you're investing in Manhattan Real Estate
and you need to mark your portfolio
to market daily. Well, what is the value
of 30 Rockefeller Center yesterday versus
today? Who knows? There's a lot more
flexibility when you are dealing with
assets that are illiquid. It's that flexibility that
gives you the potential for fraud for smoothing returns
that we are describing. The bottom line is that whether it's deliberate or inadvertent, it's the illiquidity
that gives you the opportunity for
serial correlation. Now, I'll mention very briefly
that returns smoothing, this idea of being conservative
in reporting your gains. That sounds harmless. In fact, it sounds almost good in the sense that if
you do really well, you're not going to
report all of it for fear that you may have to
lose some of it later. Isn't that a good thing for investors to be conservative? Well, the answer is no, it's actually potentially quite bad because it disadvantages different groups of investors. For example, those investors
that are cashing out, they just happened to be cashing out at the end of the month. If you under-report
your returns, you're basically
cheating them of a portion of their gains
and your advantage, the shareholders
that are staying. On the other hand, if you
under-report your losses, you're doing the opposite to those investors
that are coming in. It has consequences, people
lose and people gain. One needs to be aware of that. Now, here's a more
concrete illustration of the hypothesis that
autocorrelation goes hand in hand
with illiquidity. These are average
first-order autocorrelations for the monthly returns of individual hedge
funds in the TASS Live and graveyard databases
from February 1977 to August 2004 averaged
within categories. The first category is
convertible bond arbitrage. The light blue bar is the
autocorrelation of live funds. The red bars are the average autocorrelations
for the dead funds. You see that for
convertible arbitrage, the average first-order
autocorrelation across all the funds is
close to 35 percent. That's pretty huge. For funds of funds,
multi-strategy, for event-driven, you're
getting autocorrelations on average that's pretty high. However, if you look at the
more liquid categories, categories that are
known to involve strategies investing in very liquid
securities, like what? Like say managed futures. Managed futures by definition
are strategies where they invest in exchange
traded futures contracts, stock index, futures,
bond futures, commodity futures, and so on. Managed futures has a
very low autocorrelation. Similarly, global macro that invests in liquid
securities, very liquid. Equity market neutral, which is typically invested in
exchange traded equities. Also among the lower ones. However, emerging markets, higher illiquid and sure enough, you do get higher
autocorrelation. The other interesting pattern that I want to comment for this table is situations where you look at the differences between
live and dead funds. There are big differences
in many of these cases. The autocorrelation,
for example, for multi-strategy for Live, is up close to 20 percent, but the autocorrelation for the dead funds is six percent. Now, that's a interesting
phenomenon that I think has very intuitive
explanation, which is that funds that smooth returns
or funds that have smoother returns are going to be the ones that tend to have
better looking Sharpe ratios. They're ones that
will tend to be able to maintain assets. Whereas the funds
that don't engage in that smoothing or don't invest in those types of assets, are going to be much
more volatile and therefore more
likely to go under. That's a pretty clear
manifestation of the impact of autocorrelation on survival. Now, in a paper that my two co-authors Mila Getmansky
and Igor Makarov wrote, we tried to model this smoothness using a very simple moving
average process. If you assume that the
underlying returns of the hedge fund investment
strategies are given by a simple one factor
model but then you layer on top of this set
of virtual returns, a smoothing process, namely the observed or reported return, is simply a moving average of the virtual returns
over the last K periods and you assume that the
weights add up to one so that returns are neither
be created nor destroyed, they're simply being
redistributed to smooth that out. Then you can actually
show that smoothing returns leads to the
phenomenon that we expect. Namely, the mean is unaffected, but the variance is
reduced, therefore, the Sharpe ratio is increased by a factor that's a function of the smoothing coefficients, and that the covariances and auto covariances are
actually biased. You can actually quantify
the degree of the bias. We actually estimate this
for individual hedge funds, and we show that the smoothing coefficients
tend to be quite important for those hedge funds that are involved in the
most illiquid of strategies. In fact, if you look at the
smoothing coefficients, the ones that are the most significant among the
various different styles. In the database, you
can see that a lot of the usual suspects are present. These are by categories now, and this shows you that
among the categories, smoothing coefficients
are the most important for the most illiquid strategies like fixed income arbitrage, convertible bond
arbitrage, and so on. There's a way that you
can model illiquidity. If you can measure illiquidity, that means you can
start to manage it. We've argued that now that you know how to
measure illiquidity, now that there's a proxy for it, not a perfect proxy, but something that at least has seemed to have some
intuitive appeal, you can now construct
liquidity managed portfolios. Instead of optimizing mean
and standard deviation, you can optimize mean standard
deviation liquidity and get a mean standard deviation
liquidity frontier. That's just an
interesting application that comes out of
the econometrics. Now, what I'd like to do is
to turn from measures of liquidity to measures
of systemic risk of which liquidity will
play an important role. Systemic risk is one
of these loaded terms, particularly lately because it's been bandied about so much. I want to start by
explaining why I think hedge funds and systemic risks have something to
do with each other. It actually is fairly obvious from what's happened in 1998. But since then, there have
been many cases where hedge funds have created certain spillover effects that ultimately have some
relationship to systemic risk. What I'm going to try to
argue here and show with some very basic
econometric analysis, that systemic risk
can actually be measured at least in the
hedge fund industry, it can be measured using these liquidity
characterizations. What do we learn from 1998? The fact that liquidity
and credit are critical to the macro
economy and that they are multiplier accelerator
effects associated with liquidity and credit even
within the hedge fund world. In other words, the fact that hedge funds have access to
certain kinds of credit, gives them the ability to effectively create
high-powered money and inject money into the economy simply through the means of
leveraging their strategies. To the extent that they
have this ability, they also suffer from
the consequences if liquidity is
withdrawn very quickly. Now, in the banking
sector, as we all know, the Fed exists to
provide a buffer when banks hit liquidity shocks
and to deal with bank runs. We don't have the same
facility among hedge funds. When a hedge fund like
Bear Stearns runs into a bank panic. It's not a bank, at least
it wasn't at the time, and so it wasn't able to
get liquidity from the Fed. In some work that I've done with Mila and other co-authors, we tried to propose a number of measures of systemic risk. In particular, trying
to measure liquidity of the hedge fund system using various different
kinds of risk models like the regime switching
model that I described before and some other
measures that I won't spend time
going over here. What I'll do is just
show you a little bit about how liquidity
can actually be used as an early warning indicator for the type of
dislocation that we saw. To be very concrete about it, in October of 2004, there was an NBR conference
that Mark Kerry and Renee Stoltz hosted on the risks of financial
institutions. We presented a paper titled Systemic Risk and Hedge Funds. In that paper, we
identify two themes that we saw among the various different measures
that we came up with. One was that using these autocorrelation measures among individual hedge funds, we found that illiquidity was increasing substantially in
the hedge fund industry. Let me give you an
example of this. This is still from
2004 presentation. We looked at rolling
window autocorrelations, but where we calculated autocorrelations for
individual hedge funds. Then we took a
weighted average of those autocorrelations
every month where we weighted those
autocorrelations by the assets under management
of that hedge fund. The hedge funds that
were the biggest got the biggest weight in terms
of their autocorrelation. The blue mountain peaks are
those weighted averages. The yellow line is the
median autocorrelation cross-sectionally among
those hedge funds. The bottom light blue bars are the number of hedge
funds in the database. The point of this is that in the early parts of the database, the number of hedge
funds was very small, so the estimates might
be somewhat unreliable. But certainly within
the last few years, there are enough
hedge funds that these results are probably
reasonably stable. The point of this
rolling autocorrelation is that the weighted average
shows that there was a tremendous buildup
of illiquidity starting in 2003 and
going up to 2004, up until the time we
were measuring this; a large amount of illiquid
hedge fund exposure. It's not surprising the
hedge fund industry was growing quite a bit. LTCM turned out to be a tremendous boon for
the industry because, I guess what they say is true that it doesn't matter
what people say about you as long as they
spell your name right, it's good for you. Tremendous amounts
of assets float into the hedge fund
industry after 1998, and the strategies
that attracted the most money were the ones that had the
highest Sharpe ratios. The ones that had the
highest Sharpe ratios also were the ones that were the
most serially correlated. Not surprisingly,
serial correlation means lower volatility, smoother returns,
higher Sharpe ratio. As a result, the amount of weighted autocorrelation
was growing systematically over
this period of time. That was one indicator
that was telling us that there were some
systemic risk building up. The other was our
regime switching model. We looked at the regime
switching probability of being in a high volatility, low mean state across each of
the hedge fund categories. This is the probabilities, we just added them up. There is no interpretation to the sum of the probabilities because the events
are not independent, but just as a indicator of what the likelihood is for getting into a high vol,
low mean regime. Again, towards the end of 2004, we were getting indications that that was going
to be a problem. By the way, if you're
wondering what this peak is, this was the bursting
of the Internet bubble. If you're wondering what this
peak was, that was LTCM. The indicators of distress using these simple
econometric measures were all pointing in the
same direction in 2004. The hedge fund industry
had grown a lot, it had become more illiquid according to the
strategy indicators and the kind of volatility
that we were seeing was growing and the
risk of low mean, high-volatility stakes
was also growing. At the end of that presentation, based on these indicators, Rene asked us to come
to a conclusion. He wanted us to make some statement as to how much risk we thought
was in the system. We were hoping to hedge a bit, but we really didn't
have that option. We decided to use
the doomsday clock that I don't know how many
of you are familiar with, but this is put out by the Bulletin of Atomic
Scientists back in the 1940s to indicate how close we were to nuclear annihilation. In 1947, we were seven
minutes to midnight,1949, we were like three minutes
to midnight with detente and the other improvements
and relations we're like 11 minutes to
midnight, here's nine. At the end we thought, why don't we try to say
how many minutes to midnight we thought we
would be at in 2004. This is a slide that was the last slide in
our deck in 2004. We said we're 15
minutes to midnight from a truly systemic shock
in the hedge fund industry. Over the course of the
next couple of years, we had other papers that we wrote that
said we were getting closer and closer and
in 2005 in particular, we pointed out that the hedge fund industry
had moved even closer to some systemic shock
because we noticed another big increase in illiquidity during the
first half of 2005. The New York Times actually
published an article in September of 2005 where
they featured our paper. The paragraph at the very end, which I blew up here for you, I can't resist, the reporter said,
"The nightmare script for Mr. Lo would be a series of collapses of highly
leveraged hedge funds that bring down the major banks or brokerage firms
that lend to them." Now, this was in
September of 2005, and when it came out, we got a couple of
calls from friends on Wall Street that
said, "Are you nuts?" You think that hedge
funds coming down could actually bring down
broker-dealers? You're crazy. Yet the econometric evidence
was actually pretty clear that the exposures
were fairly large. Now, in fact, it was ironic because around
that same time, there was an industry
publication that came out that directly
contradicted our conclusions. It was the Counterparty
Risk Management Working Group that was put together by a number of the most prestigious
firms in the industry. In their introduction,
this came out in July, so it's just two months before that New
York Times article. In their introduction, this report said, "In
approaching its task, the policy group shared
a broad consensus that the already low
statistical probabilities of the occurrence of truly systemic financial shocks had further declined over time," and we had no idea
how they were able to ascertain that because all of the indicators that we
looked at suggest that the probabilities
were increasing. We noted with some humor
that in that same report, they also pointed out two
observations that we thought were pretty obviously
contradictory to their conclusions, which is that to cope with
serious back-office and potential settlement problems in the credit default swap market. That was one of the issues that a lot of these firms didn't
even know what their risks were because they hadn't
caught up on the paperwork of all the credit default
swaps that they had written in the years prior. Secondly, they also pointed out that the
practice of being able to assign your leg of these swaps
without prior permission, so the assignment issue was a tremendous problem in not knowing who your
counter-parties were. These things suggested to
us that the business was growing a lot faster than
it should have been, and again, this is also part of the econometric evidence. By the way, the companies
that were part of that Counterparty
Risk Management Working Group,
they're listed here. The firms that are in red blew
up or had to be acquired, the firms in blue had
to be bailed out. It was just a poetic
justice given what their conclusions were. How do you deal with that? How do you measure
systemic risk in a somewhat more direct fashion apart from this
illiquidity measure? Well, in some recent work
that we've been doing, we proposed to use a very
simple idea that comes from the time series literature,
Granger causality tests. If you recall, a Granger
causality relationship, is a relationship where
a particular variable can predict another variable in the future, but
not vice-versa. So for example, X is set to
Granger cause Y if X can predict future Y but Y
cannot predict future X. There's a unidirectional
relationship. If it's bidirectional,
then there's just feedback between
the two or simultaneity, but Granger causality can
be quantified by using regressions of variables
run against their own lags, as well as lags of
other time-series and a relationship
of Granger causality has to do with whether or not the off-diagonal
elements are non-zero. You can use a Granger
causality test to see whether or not there
are relationships among different financial
institutions particularly if they happen to be publicly traded and get a sense of how connected
the system is. One way to capture a
systemic risk is to simply measure the Granger
causality relationships among hedge funds, banks, broker-dealers,
and insurance companies. You basically run
these regressions on a rolling window
basis every month and you measure the various different levels of statistical significance. When you plot them, you get this kind of a network. Now, I haven't
explained to you a little bit about
the nomenclature. The different colors represent
the different industries. Green is for hedge funds, blue is for banks, red is for broker-dealers, and black is for
insurance companies. These are all
publicly traded firms with the exception
of hedge funds, which are obviously private
investment vehicles. These lines represent statistically significant
relationships at the five percent level of Granger causality between
one entity and another. When you see a green line
going to a black dot, or a black name here, what that's saying
is that there's a significant Granger
causal relationship between a hedge fund last month and an insurance
company this month. If you see a lot of green lines, that's saying that there's
a lot of Granger causality from that industry. If a lot of those lines are
converging onto one point then that means that
there's a lot of Granger causality
to that one entity. If on the other hand,
you see a lot of lines emanating from one point that says that there's one
firm that is Granger causing a lot of other firms. Anyway, this is the picture
as of the five-year window from January 1994
to December 1996. This is what it looked
like from January 19, 2006 to December 2008. Quite a bit of a difference, from '94-'96 and 2006-2008,
a three-year rolling window. Sorry, I think I
said five years., it's three-year rolling window. If you look at this from
various different periods, you'll notice that you get some very big changes
in the network. In fact, we decided to make
a little movie of this, and so I don't know if this will play here. Can you see it? Whoops. Where's this now? It's playing. I hear this. This is just illustrating
how the movie is made by looking at the
various different periods. As you play it over time, you see that there's
actually quite a bit of change in this network. There are periods where there
are strong relationships. That was an example
where there was a lot of causality from a small
number of institutions. This is, not much is going on. Here you can see one firm getting impacted by lots
of different firms. Sorry about the music, is something to make
this interesting. What you see over time is that the network actually changes quite a bit and in particular, it changes a lot as you get closer to the latter
part of the sample. There are some very
clear points of concentration among
certain broker-dealers. AIG shows up prominently here. A number of the largest
investment banks show up, of course, Citigroup,
J.P. Morgan. The patterns actually change as a function of
market conditions. So the question is
whether using this, this is now LTCM and
the Internet bubble together and you can see some really strong relationships among the various
different entities. Let me stop this. We're not going to win
an Oscar for that. The point is that
using these networks, we think we can actually deduce certain kinds of relationships. You can actually see the names of the relationships that have the most significant
network connections among the various different
entities many of which were institutions
that got affected, and you can see them
in a couple of cases, years before the
crisis actually built. For the last part of this talk, what I want to do is to turn to specific examples of financial
crises in particular, August 1998, August
2007, May of 2010. I want to show how econometric methods can
actually be used to deduce certain kinds of
systemic shocks where you might not think they would
be particularly helpful. The references here
are some papers that I wrote with my co-author,
Amir Khandani, but also a paper that
you can get online from a high-frequency
broker-dealer named Nan x about the Flash
Crash May 2010. Let me start with August of
2007 because I think that is something that a number of you probably have heard
about and remember. That was a strange month where during the
middle of the month there was something that
ultimately people referred to as the quant crisis or
the quant meltdown. What they're referring to is that during the second
week of August, which probably none
of you remember, all of these quantitative
hedge funds, particularly equity
market neutral or stat arb hedge funds, they all lost money
at the same time. It became so prominent and significant that the
Wall Street Journal actually wrote an
article about this, a front page article
on September 7th. How market turmoil
way laid the quants. They mentioned a number
of hedge funds and prop trading desks, including
Morgan Stanley. Specifically what happened,
was during August 7th, 8th, 9th, the three days in
the second week of August, huge losses occurred among a very small group of very
specialized hedge funds, and the strange thing
is, nobody knew why. Typically, when a hedge fund
loses money, you know why. When LTCM lost money
in August of 1998, we knew why, credit
spreads widened. When the Internet bubble burst, lots of hedge funds lost money because they were invested
in Internet stocks. Internet stocks went down. If you were to ask, why the quantitative equity
market neutral funds lost money in the second week of August you couldn't actually put
your finger on anything. Stocks moved up,
stocks moved down. They moved left, right. There
was no obvious pattern. The problem is that
it's hard to figure out because they
weren't talking. Sometime by the third week of August I had heard
about this from some of my former students and colleagues that were
in the industry, I called a few of them up. I said, "What's going on? Why, are you losing money?" They said, "Look, I can't say anything but even if
I could say anything, I don't think I have
anything to say." That tells you that there
was something really strange about what was
happening that day. My student at the
time, Amir Khandani I, thought that we want to figure out what happened but
we obviously can't do that without the data
for these hedge funds so let's do something
that is close, which is, let's simulate a very simple strategy that hedge funds like
these might be using. We went to the literature and looked at a very simple
strategy that was used by Bruce Lehman and myself and Craig MacKinlay in
two separate papers, which is a very simple
mean reversion strategy. This is a strategy that basically
looks at the returns of a particular stock
k days ago and compares it to the average
return of stocks on that day. If that return was greater than the average then today,
we would short it, and if on that day, k days ago, it was less then we
would buy it today. Effectively, what the strategy
does is to buy the losers from k days ago and sell the
winners from k days ago. It's essentially a mean
reversion strategy. The actual strategy
is given here. The portfolio weights
Omega it is minus one over n times the
return on i k days ago, minus the average return
across all stocks k days ago. If you look at the
way we structured that and you take the
sum of those weights, they add up to 0. You can think of these not
necessarily as fractions, but you can think of them as
actually dollar investments. It doesn't matter scale is irrelevant since the
sum is equal to 0. This is a market
neutral investment. In order to compute the return, you have to get a
sense of the scale. The scale and this
investment is simply the absolute value of the
weights divided by two, that's like the dollar
amount, long and short. They equal the same thing. That's why you have
to divide by two, you're double
counting otherwise. The rate of return of this
equity market neutral strategy is simply
the portfolio weights multiplied by the return. You can think of this as
the dollar profit divided by the amount that
you're long or short. That's the calculation
that we did. The one thing that we had to
worry about was leverage. I'll come to leverage
in a minute. But the reason that we
use the strategy was because it's very simple to compute the profit
of the strategy. In particular, when you calculate the expected
value of the profit, it turns out to be a function of the means, standard deviations, and the covariances and, auto covariances of the returns. It's a very nice a microscope to use to look at
what's been going on because you can
calculate the moments of the expected profits as a function of the time
series properties of the underlying returns. Let me show you the
historical performance of this strategy. It's a very simple strategy, we applied it to the top 1,500 stocks on a daily basis
and we use k equal to one. We're looking at mean reversion relative to yesterday's returns. These are the average daily
returns of the strategy applied to all the stocks in
that 1,500 stock universe, as well as to the various different deciles
from smallest to largest. We break down the average
return on a daily basis, year by year from 1995-2007. Let's just start with
the 1995 return. The 1995 return is
1.38 percent per day. That is a big return because
you got to multiply it by 252 to figure out what the average annual return
is. That's a big return. Now, I don't want to focus
on the level of the return, it's obviously unrealistic
because we have not deducted
transactions costs are other market frictions and can you literally trade
1,500 stocks every day. It's very hard. There's
lots of issues. But what I want to point
out is that this is a very consistent strategy
in the sense that if you look at the annual averages
across all the years, they're all positive,
but they're declining monotonically
with maybe one exception. Virtually every year,
year after year, the returns are going down
until the very last year of our simulation you're getting an average daily return
of about 13 basis points. Now, 13 basis points, it's still pretty attractive, that's still like 30
percent return a year but it's much less
than 138 basis points. Now what about risk? Well, if you calculate the
daily standard deviation of the strategy, let's do that. The daily standard
deviation starts out in 1995 at 40 basis points. Forty basis point daily standard deviation versus 138 basis point daily average return gives you a daily Sharpe ratio
of about three, which when you multiply
it by the square root of 252, let's call it 256, so it's 16, 16 times 3, you're getting an
annualized Sharpe ratio in excess of 45. It's a big number. Clearly unrealistic, it's
not meant to be realistic. Although actually in a minute, I'm going to argue that there are some realistic
elements to it that many hedge funds took
advantage of during that time. But anyway, this shows
you that the risk is 40 basis points and the risk actually moves around a bit
but in the very last year, the risk was at 72 basis points. The year prior 2006, it was at 52 basis points. We're almost there now in terms
of being able to simulate the performance of this
strategy during August 2007. The one final feature that
I want to talk about is this idea of profitability versus assets under management. In this graph, I simply display the average profitability
year-by-year of that strategy. As we saw, it started
out being very profitable at 138
basis points per day, but by 2007 it went down to
13 basis points per day, so pretty significant and smooth decline in profitability,
not surprisingly. What I've displayed
in the blue bars, as well as the red bars, is the assets under
management in the tasks hedge fund database
in the categories equity, market neutral and
long/short equity. What this shows is that
during this period where this strategy continued
to lose value, assets were flowing into
strategies like this. Now, how does that make sense? How could it be? Why would investors
be putting money into this thing if it's
becoming less profitable? Well, actually one argument you can make is that the
reason it's less profitable is because people are putting more money into it, that's certainly a factor. But nevertheless,
how could investors be so stupid to be putting money here after the strategy had declined so much in
value over here, why would you a
year or two later, continue to put more
money into the strategy? The answer is leverage. These are the strategy
returns without leverage. But what if you were to enhance those returns by
leveraging them? Let me just explain to
you how leverage works. Most of you probably
already know this, but for the sake of
those who may not, the typical hedge
fund in this category engages in a matched book
on the long and short side, meaning that for $100
million of capital, they typically take $100
million of long positions, coupled with $100 million
of short positions, so their net
positions nets out to zero but for
regulatory purposes, that's not their leverage. The way you calculate
leverage is take the absolute value
of those positions, add them together, divide
by the amount of equity, and that's your leverage. In the very top example, the leverage is 2:1. As I mentioned at the very
beginning of this lecture, hedge funds can leverage
far greater than 2:1. For example, a number
of hedge funds during this time
period were able to, with $100 million of capital, take positions on the order of $500 million long and
$500 million short. That's 10:1 leverage for
these kinds of funds. In general, when hedge funds leverage Theta to one they're basically able to multiply their returns by Theta over two. You multiply the actual
returns by that, which means you multiply
the mean which you also multiply the variance, increased risk, and
expected return. The question that we asked
in our calculation is, how much leverage would
hedge fund have to deploy in 2007 in order to achieve the same level of
expected return that it enjoyed in 1998? The answer is pretty simple. In a few minutes I'll explain why I picked
that as the base year. In 1998, the average
daily return for the simulated strategy was
about 50 basis points per day. Let's assume that the
return multiplier is one, that's the base year. Well, if it turns out
that we look at 2007, where the expected return
is 13 basis points, we would need leverage
of 8.96 in order to multiply the returns
by 4.48 to yield 5.57. In other words, you
would need leverage of close to 9:1 in order to get the same expected
return as you enjoyed in 1998
with no leverage. What we decided to
do was to assume 8:1 leverage because that was what it was in
the prior year. Going into 2007, you said, how much leverage do I
need to get to my level of expected return in 1998,
it's 8:1 leverage. With 8:1 leverage, what did this strategy
look like in terms of its statistical
properties in 2007? With 8:1 leverage, you're multiplying
by returns by four. That means that starting
in the beginning of 2007, where these were
your statistics, your expected return with
60 basis points per day, with a volatility of 200
basis points per day. That's your profile
going into 2007. The reason that I'm telling
you all this is I want to set you up to understand how tumultuous that second week of August was
for these managers. Going into this year, you have a strategy that on average earns you
60 basis points a day and on average has volatility of about
200 basis points. Now, let's see what
happened in August. This simulates the
daily returns of that very simple strategy
going into end of July, beginning of August, so
these are the daily returns. What's marked in
blue are August 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th. Let's see what
happened. First of all, at the end of the month, you
actually did quite well. Sixty basis points is your
expected rate of return per day but on July 30th and 31st, you earned 177 basis points
and 146 basis points. Of course, on August
the second you lost 122 basis points but
on the other hand, on August 6th, you
made 200 basis points, so your returns a whipping
around pretty good. August 7th, Tuesday, you lose 464 basis
points, 4.6 percent. That's more than two
standard deviations. Now, as we all know, a two standard
deviation event happens roughly one out of every 20
days, right? Five percent. Two Sigma event is certainly something that
will get your attention, but it's not a problem
until you reach August 8th, which is now another
event, but this time, it's closer to a four
or five Sigma event. You now, on August 8th,
with this strategy, have lost 11 percent. That is big. That is a big event, particularly after having lost 4.6 percent the day before. What was really bizarre
about these two days is that when you look at all of the various
different indexes, nothing weird was going on. For example, let's take a look. On Tuesday, August of 7th, the S&P 500 was actually
up 62 basis points. The S&P small cap index
was up 71 basis points. The MSCI, emerging markets
index was up 45 basis points. If you look at the
VIX, the VIX went down on that Tuesday. Across all of these indicators, there was nothing weird. You couldn't identify
any one thing that would cause these losses. You're a manager, you just lost two standard deviations
yesterday and now today, you've lost four
standard deviations. That's a really rare event
that's got your attention. Then on Thursday, August 9th, you lose another four
standard deviations. Within three days, you have lost 25 percent
of your capital. A quarter of your
assets have been wiped out and you don't know why. There's no reason for it. I remember at the time
in the aftermath, the Goldman Sachs Chief
Financial Officer, David Viniar, he was cited as
saying that this was a really tumultuous period for us because we had a
25 Sigma event occur. Now, I realize that he's
not a statistician. But frankly, nobody
should ever be allowed to say that a 25
Sigma event occurred. Because the last time
that occurred was sometime during the
Cretaceous period. Obviously, you've
got the Sigma wrong, but in any case, using that basis of
200 basis points, a really big set of events occurred during
those three days; August 7th, 8th and 9th, and nobody understood it. Now, what was even more
frustrating was along the way, because these
managers presumably had no idea what was going on, what would your natural
inclination be? When you lose two Sigma and then another four Sigma
and you don't know why, your natural inclination is to take some risk off the table. Cut risk, that's the
responsible thing to do, reduce your exposures.
Managers do that. They reduce their
exposures and in doing so, probably cause more of the
losses on that Thursday, but then they reduce
exposure even more and what happen on Friday? On Friday, this strategy
posted a 23.67 percent gain. It actually flipped back. There was a reversal, now, of extraordinary magnitude. This is like 12 standard
deviation reversal. Of course, when you go down by 25 percent and you
go up by 25 percent, you don't get back
to zero, do you? I remember when I
was in high school, I sat in on an economic
class being taught at Queens College and
the instructor, a graduate student was giving a numerical example
to the class saying that GDP going down by
10 percent from 100-90. Later on in the example, she said it would go up
by 10 percent from 90-99. Somebody in the class said,
"Excuse me, professor. Why is it the case that
when you go down by 10 percent and you
go up by 10 percent, you don't get back to 100?" She thought about it for
a minute and she said, "Well, economics is
an inexact science." I always remember that. The fact is that
you didn't get back to even because you cut risk, and even if you didn't cut risk, you wouldn't get back to even. A number of managers
locked in their losses at this point and it was an incredibly frustrating
and tumultuous period, particularly because of what
was going on in markets. Now, there's a hint at what might have been going on
starting Thursday, August 9th. On Thursday, August 9th, look what happens to the S&P. The S&P now drops by almost
three percent in one day. That's a big move for the S&P, and the VIX shoots up by
five points in that one day. Now, what's not displayed
here is the LIBOR OIS spread. It turns out that right around now is when that spread blows out and then on the evening of August 9th
and into August 10th, that's when the central
banks across the world decide to inject
massive amounts of liquidity into the system. But it had nothing
to do with equities. Equities are just equities, and yet somehow equity market neutral
managers were feeling it, but ripple effects
were tremendous. Now, the last thing I
want to make before I propose a conjecture, because we don't know, in fact, what happened,
but we have a conjecture. The last thing I want to
do is to take a look at the same strategy back
in August of 1998. Let's compare what
happened in 2007 with '98. Because during '98, we
also had a credit crisis. August 17th was when Russia defaulted on its GK
or government bonds. On August 17th to 1998, the same strategy
generated a return of 96 basis points, positive. August 21st, when LTCM
reported a loss of $600 million to their
portfolio or one day loss of $600 million back when $600 million
really meant something. On that day, this strategy
produced the return of positive 1.04 percent. On September the 3rd, when LTCM sent out
their investor letter saying that they might
actually not be able to maintain their positions, they may have to liquidate. On that day, this
strategy produced the return of positive
1.41 percent. On September 24th, 1998, when the bailout of
LTCM was announced, on that day, this
strategy produced a positive return
of 1.21 percent. In other words, during
August of 1998, when we had what seemed like a really serious and very
similar credit crisis, a flight to quality, a global flight to quality, equity markets
couldn't care less. Certainly, this strategy
couldn't care less in sense of not showing any kind of
dislocation whatsoever. In fact, it was quite
a profitable period for this type of strategy. Now, let me take all of
these observations and try to weave them together into
some kind of conjecture. This is the conjecture
that we came up with. We propose that in
August of 2007, we had a situation where equity market neutral
funds were being unwound. That is, their
positions were being liquidated for some reason. Most likely, the
reason was because some investors or
portfolio managers needed to raise cash, and they needed to
raise it quickly, which means that they're
going to try to sell the thing that was the
most easy to sell, namely, the liquid
exchange traded assets. Those unwindings caused
the losses initially, and those losses then caused
other funds that were not trying to liquidate to reduce their exposures
and unwind as well. This unwinding process became a positive feedback
loop that ultimately cascaded into large losses that then long/short managers, as well as long-only
managers started to respond to and unwound more and by
Friday, August of 10th, the unwinding was done, the pressure to liquidate was finished and markets rebounded because there was no
fundamental information that was causing these
market price changes. It was really due to the price
pressure of the unwinding. Once the pressure is removed, the prices swing back and the Friday rebound was consistent with the fact
that this was an unwinding, not an information-based trade. There are a number of lessons
that we draw from this, but before I talk about that, let me show you a little
bit of further analysis. What if we looked a
little bit deeper, not just into this very
simple strategy, but rather, let's look at long/short
portfolios that are formed using certain
accounting factors, valuation factors that
investors might be using. We look at a variety of different factors, five of them; book to market,
earnings to price, cashflows to price, price momentum, and earnings momentum. We rank the S&P 1500 stocks monthly by these factors and
then we basically invest a dollar long in the
highest decile and short the lowest decile to get the usual long/short
portfolios and simulate the returns
of those strategies. If you do that from
the beginning of 2007 to the end
using daily data, what you notice is a very
interesting pattern. Starting in the
beginning of July, you notice a
systematic decline of factors of one sort at a systematic increase of
factors of another sort. The momentum factors
are going up and the various relative value and valuation factors
are going down. One interpretation
of that is that the particular portfolios
that were constructed with those factors in mind were being liquidated systematically
during the course of the month. Anecdotally we've asked portfolio
managers in this space, is it true that you were liquidating during
the month of July? They all said to us, yeah
we were because risk was increasing because of
the subprime crisis Bear Stearns had happened
earlier on that year, we were worried going into
the second half of the year, and we wanted to cut
back our risks so we started liquidating our
positions beginning of July, little by little, we
started unwinding. You notice that the
beginning of August there's an even bigger blip as if something happened during
that first, second week. We decided to look at even
intraday what was going on. We got ticked data from The
New York Stock Exchange for the months of July,
August and September. We simulated a very simple market-making strategy
actually we use the five factors
intraday and so we're able to show that intraday you had these
liquidations going on, but we did something
a little bit more generic we
wanted to know what happened to market-making
during August 2007. We simulated a very, very simple mean reversion
strategy in winners and losers using tick data over the course of a
five-minute returns, 10 minute returns, 20-minute
returns and so on. We asked the question, what
is the profitability of these market-making strategies during these various intervals? Here's a graph of starting
with the month of July, the beginning of July, going through the
end of September. What I'm going to show you
is the cumulative profits from mean reversion strategies at various different
holding periods, for example this is
a cumulative profit of one hour mean
reversion strategy. Every hour you buy losers of
the previous hour and you short sell the winners from the previous hour as a way of doing a proxy
for market-making, and the red lines indicate
that second week of August, August 6th through 10th. You can see that for
the most part other than the little
bit of a dip here, you're making money in this hourly mean
reversion strategy, it's positively sloped. Now let's take a
look at a higher frequency strategy,
half an hour. Half an hour and
you're also making money but not much more or
less than the one hour. How about 15 minutes? Fifteen minutes you're
actually making more money the slope is greater but
you've got a bigger dip. You've lost money actually
during that week of August and you've started
recovering afterwards. How about 10 minutes? How about five minutes? The five minute return is really where things
get interesting. Look at what happens
to the strategy. First of all, the
strategy has got a positive slope so
it's very profitable. Five minute mean reversion
makes money throughout July, throughout the beginning
of August up until the first day of August and then it's flat and
slightly negative. Then it's negative throughout the week and even going
into the next week and then it recovers and it goes on its merry way continuing to
be profitable every day. Looking at this, we have a conjecture about
what might have happened during that
second week of August. The narrative that we developed is that during
the month of July, there was general unwinding
of these strategies. The unwinding picked
up in the beginning of August for a variety
of reasons not the least of which could be that the returns of these hedge funds were computed during
that first week of August and it may be
that they triggered some credit issues
that had to be dealt with and further
unwinding has had to occur. In any case, during that
second week of August, during the first day the profits actually were stable
and level and declined. Now, if you're a high-frequency
market maker and you're making money every
single day for the last month and
all of a sudden on one day you lose money
that's significant. What would you do as a market
maker with this a profile? The natural thing to do is to pull back your
capital if you can. A New York Stock
Exchange specialists is not allowed to do that. As the NYSE specialists, you are obligated you're a designated
market-makers so you cannot not trade with the public when the
public wants to trade. But as a high-frequency
hedge fund you can, and over the last 10 years a lot more of the market
making capital, a lot more liquidity
is being provided by high frequency prop
desks and hedge funds. We conjecture that after these initial losses
the high frequency guys just decided I'm not
playing anymore, I'm out of the game. I'm going to sit out until my system start working again. This we conjecture
has the effect of one party of a seesaw getting off without letting
the other party know, and so when the
market makers all of a sudden disappear and now
the usual suspects go to trade and unwind their
portfolio what they find is they're stepping into a much deeper hole
than they did before. You get an air pocket, a big drop in prices and so
you get this phenomenon. But once the unwinding are over the market-makers
come back and they become perfectly
profitable yet again. There are lots of other pieces of evidence that seemed to suggest this
phenomenon did occur. It's all indirect
evidence though we don't have any direct
knowledge because there's no way to
get information at this point only through
these simulations. But what it suggests is an intriguing potential
explanation for what happened now in May of 2010. There are some
important differences though so I want
to make sure that we don't get the impression that the events were the same. But the idea of high frequency strategies
becoming more and more important in market dynamics I think that's the common
theme between the two. Using these kinds of
econometric decompositions, I think that we can
actually come up with some useful guidelines for how we think about
systemic risk. Let me wrap this up
and I'm going to leave some extra time for
Q&A discussion. There are lots of topics
for future research in financial econometrics that
the hedge fund industry I think naturally suggest, time varying parameter estimates
of hedge fund returns, dynamic correlations,
rare events, how to model funding, risk, leverage and market dislocation, welfare implications
of hedge funds. Do they really provide a
valuable social service in all of the liquidity
that they inject? Then finally, the industrial organization of the
hedge fund industry. Does that leave any room
for improvement given the perverse incentives
that seemed to be created with some
of the contracts? Let me conclude with
a little bit of an overview about the current
trends in the industry. As I mentioned at the very start the hedge fund industry is very dynamic and it has already reinvented itself over the last three years thanks
to the financial crisis. Assets are getting near an all time high yet again and
they're growing and for reasons that we discussed we think that they're going to grow even more over the
course of the next few years. The registration process will
almost surely be part of the new regulatory reform bill and the hedge funds will likely have to provide
a lot more disclosure. Also as part of the
new reform bill which was passed just yesterday, there's going to
be a creation of the Financial Stability
Oversight Council, which is going to be
the heads of all of the financial
regulatory agencies and also the creation of the
Office of Financial Research, which as part of Treasury will be responsible for
collecting and managing all of the data
in the financial industry. This is something that I
think it's going to be a tremendous value
and importance and hopefully the NBER will play a big role in helping the OFR because of the
experience of the NBER in dealing with this
data and the research. If the Volcker Rule gets implemented the way
that it's been written, a lot more hedge
funds are going to be created because
institutions will now have to get rid of their
prop trading desks and other types of hedge
fund activities so that they will be walled
off and in hedge funds. As a result I think the hedge fund industry
is going to become even larger and more important as it responds to this financial
regulatory reform. That suggests that
there's going to be a lot more opportunities for academics and financial
econometricians and that the hedge fund industry
will continue to pose really interesting
research questions that I think will be able to answer over
the next few years. Thank you and let me stop here. 