Lars A. Lochstoer: This
paper was motivated exactly by thinking about long
term asset allocation and long-term investment. Basically, when you're starting to think about those issues, there's a couple of things
that are immediate. Number 1 is, it's got to be about conditional dynamics
of the return [inaudible]. Everything is IID. The long run isn't any different than just a simple
sequence of short run. That's not a particularly
interesting thing. The second thing
is it's incredibly difficult. It's very difficult. Part that's difficult actually analytically to get solutions, but empirically, it's
a tremendous challenge because we know
we have to try to estimate conditional
expected returns and maybe a high
dimensional state-space. I'd say very
complicated exercise. As a result, I think
it's pretty fair to say that most researchers are very often that these
researchers and practitioners resort to tools, developed more of a
myopic situation. For instance, just like one month mean-variance type problem is something we see
again and again. What we're going
to think about in this paper is going to flipping the perspective a little bit. We're going to say, well, this is all very difficult stuff. But one thing we could think
about doing is looking at returns at
different frequencies. If you're a one-month investor, that's your horizon, you're interested in one month returns. But maybe for one year
or two year investors, you would really want to look at two-year returns, for instance. The idea of why that
might be interesting, and we're going to call
those different frequencies. We're going to look
at them jointly, not just one at a time. We're going to call them
multi-horizon returns. There's MHR, acronym
is going to pop up. The reason to testing on or thinking about those things and unconditional moments of multi-horizon returns
are interesting is that they will reflect conditional dynamics
and an example that we used in the literature. We're not just going
to do that obviously, would be variance ratio. At the market
level, we know that the variance ratio
measures unit per time. As you increase the horizon, various ratios tend often to go down because of meaner version indicating long and
investors might be willing to hold more equity. Here's what we're going
to do in this paper, we're going to use
multi-horizon returns to test asset pricing models. What we're going to
do is to take a bunch of models, standard models, and we're going to
frame them in terms of a stochastic discount
factor because I know how to accumulate the stochastic discount
factor over time. I just multiply them together. What we're going to think
about is in that setting, what does multi-horizon
returns do for us? It is going to be a
conditional test of the model. I'm going to show you that very explicitly as a general point. We're not going to talk
too much about this, but we're going to
develop a way to estimate a particular GMM
estimation technique where we use multi-horizon
returns to the input. We're going to argue that
this is informative. Just to give you a flavor
of why it's informative. Think about a model
has a small error, but it's a persistent
there, and so, now, as you make that
error over two years, it can become a large error and that's what we're going
to exploit at some level. The application we're
going to have is linear factor models. This is our null.
I'm going to talk about alternative later on. The M is the SDF and then a minus b are
some coefficients, the a parameter is effectively matching the risk-free rate. The b can be a vector of coefficients and F is
some factor returns. If you want to think
about F is like the HML, SMB and market factor
or Fama-French, that'll be an example of that. That's going to be the set of models we're going
to think about. In that set of models, we know that b times F is supposed to be
unconditional MVE portfolio. That's the classic. This is the SDF version of that. We're going to find pervasive
misspecification in basically all the standard
models that can lead to, in some cases, large
long run pricing errors. Then in the second exercise, we're going to think
about an alternative. How could we fix it? We're going to add these
motorized and returns to actually say something about what type of conditional
dynamics we're going to show up as a^T and b^T and this
coefficient can be time-bearing. I'll explain why exactly. That's going to be
very interesting, is going to give
us some sense of some puzzling
features of the data. Let me just spend
two slides exactly delineating what adding multi-horizon
returns does for us. Number 1, conditional
law of one price. We all know that just a
notation t minus 1 comma t. I'm just highlighting here
that we're going to think about the maturities
or horizons. Here's the exercise I'm going
to go through right now. Think about the
second bullet here. Think about a candidate
stochastic discount factor that prices a set of assets unconditionally and R
here is our gross returns. Now, I'm going to ask
the following question, which is the final bullet. What do we gain by looking at, let's say it was
monthly returns, let's think about
two months returns. Now, what does that bias? If you look below, that's how you would gross up the discount factor to M so
just multiplied together. Returns are here gross returns. If you want to think about HTML, I'm just going to
take HTML and add the risk-free as it goes for it because that'll be
my gross return. That's how you would do
that. Should still be equal to one if this is
the right model. Now, I'm going to do something. The first on the
left-hand side here, it's the same as before is a
two-year MR. Tooth months, I should say MR condition. I'm just going to do the usual thing where I say if the expectation of X times
Y is the expectation of X times expectation of
Y plus the covariance. That's what I have on the right-hand side
of that equality, and so, that's the expectation
of the one-month return, t minus 1 to t times
the expectation of the one month return again, but from now from t to t plus 1. If that model works by
covariance stationarity, both of those things
are equal to one. Then I get a covariance
term which says, well, if I want everything
here to be equal to 1, that covariance needs
to be equal to 0 and then the covariance is M_t minus 1^t R_t minus
1 MR should not co-vary then with M^t
plus 1 times R^t plus 1, and that just says you
shouldn't be able to predict M times R.
That's a very baseline. M times R should be an
expectation always equal to 1. You can't predict it. That's just what
we're going to check. We're going to check
if the pricing error, if you will, is going
to be predictable. That's the same as unusual as what the second
bullet here is saying. It looks a lot like,
if you remember Cochran's textbook
when you're talking about an instrument and GMM, you said this is ZT
his put in and that's the instrument that could tell us about conditional dynamics. It looks identical except the instrument here is
endogenous to the model. I didn't pick it out of a hat or come up with and having
looked at the data, it isn't over
identifying restriction that comes from the
null hypothesis, which I'm free to impose and we can see it might
not be informative. It was very noisy
and not useful, but at least it's a modeling
application we can test. Just one quick note. We're going to look at
the multiple horizons. We're going to look
at horizons 1, 2, 3, 6, 12 and 24 months as it were. What you get when you do this
GMM type tests are you get overlapping observations, and that's not a
great thing if you want to think about spectral density matrix and
these type of things. What we're going to
do is we're going to use this trick we're using here to write a two period one in terms of the one-period top plus
the covariance term. Because the covariance,
we can always think about predicting one period
ahead pricing error. We go through this in more
than a paper but it's a very nice thing because our moment conditions under null, they will not be autocorrelated. This is important for
the size of the test. In fact, we also do a
Bootstrap version here to account for some
nonlinearities that might be important. That's a technical issue, but that's how we're going
to implement this. The data on the models,
and like I said, is going to be linear
factor models. The data we're going
to do a bunch of standard model is like
the standard CAPM, we're going to add
a betting against Beta type factor constructed
from Ken French's data. We're going to do the FF3 and FF5 in Fama-French 3
and 5 factor models. Actually, I forgot to add. I was going to add
[inaudible] to one of them. We're going to think
about the camp Daniel and co-authors have a new version of the
Fama-French factor models where they hedge out industry risks and those have way
higher sharp ratios. These are very fancy, very high sharp ratio models. We have volatility managed Fama-French five-factor
[inaudible] . We have this dumbbell in
Yuan model four-factors. Two of them are new
capturing some mispricings. It's a roster of models. The sample is a usual
samples '63-2017. The test assets. Let me just mention this, the test assets are the
gross risk-free rates. The base horizon is monthly, the gross risk-free rate, then it is excess
returns factors of the model itself.
Let me explain that. Let's say you have
the market factor, you can try to
explain the market; the one-month horizon, but you can also
try to explain it up to two months horizon,
or to three months. You accumulate up
the gross return to the market for three months and subtract off
the gross return to risk-free rate
for three months. That's the excess return. Why do we use those
as test assets? Well, we do that because
now I know that trivially, the alternative where At and Bt in this stochastic
discount factor, is to our time-varying
that alternative can price that model conditionally. The factors can price themselves conditionally if I
allow At and Bt. I know that there exists
a model with time on At and Bt that prices the
long horizon returns. That's why we set
it up like that. I think I mentioned,
but horizons are 1,2,3,6,12, and 24 months. We're trying to get at a
reasonable set of months. Before we start here, they're a little small
here on the screen, but I want to show you
some summary stats of these factor models
which are going to inform where we're going here. The plots A, B, and C are autocorrelations
cumulatively over months. The x-axis is from 1-24 months. There's a bunch of lines
here, but that's okay. I just wanted to give
you a general sense. I wish this thing
doesn't exactly work, but if you were looking
at the top-left, the blue line is the
cumulative auto-correlation of the market from 1-24 months. It's basically
hovering around zero, positive a little bit, until about 18 months so it
starts going negative. That's the market, but
it's hovering around zero. If you start looking at
the other factors there, that's the Fama-French
Five-Factor Model, they're way more positively
auto-correlated. You start getting a lot of
positive auto-correlation. The scale is the same
on all the three A, B, and C plots. If you go to the DMRS
factors that are just industry and other risks hedged Fama-French factors, the auto-correlation
is way higher, meaning that you're
getting a ton of dynamics there, and
that's a warning sign. If you want to invest
for a long time and there's a ton of dynamics, you've got to pay attention, not for all factors, but
for some of them. The bottom there
is betting against beta and this time by yuan,
so it's about the same. The bottom right is the
variance ratios for the MVE, in the sample MVE mean-variance efficient
combination of the factors. I just want to
summarize the model. For the market, I know the following
about a variance ratio. It goes up a tiny bit above one as it increases
their horizon, then it starts falling at
about 18 months to two years, as you have been in
reversion kicks in. These other models, the
market is basically hovering around that
straight line at the bottom. The other model
is, for instance, the DMRS model gets
a variance ratio at a 24-month horizon above two, meaning that if you hold
statically rebalanced back to the MVE combination
of those factors if you want to do
that for two years, you're going to take
twice as much variance per unit of time as
someone who's doing this. That might be a problem. Here we've got to pay attention. But so anyway, that's just
some motivating plots. Let me show you, again,
this is not a formal test. Let me show you what
happens if you calibrate each model at the
one-month horizon where the factors
price themselves. Then you look at
pricing errors of the factors at
horizons 1-24 months. We don't go that far out of
time because we want to have 30 independent years in our
observations I should say. Again, the scale is hard to see here, let me explain this. On top, I define a
pricing error is the m times r minus rf. It
should be equal to zero. The scale of that investment is $1 because it's a gross return. If you look at the
top left here of market plus BAB,
you start at zero. There's no pricing error
at the one-month horizon. Trivially, if you go to
the 24-month horizon, which is the amnion, look at the red dotted, dashed line here. That's the betting
against beta factor constructed with
Fama-French data, the pricing error is the
order of 20 percent. Let's annualize it to 10. If you're trying to
explain a risk premium of 6-7 percent in the pricing error or annualized is
about 10 percent. That seems it might,
maybe it's just noise, but maybe there's
a problem here. Stambaugh Yuan, they go up to 40 percent for some factors.
Some factors are fine. The market tends to be more
fun on the other factors. Fama-French or certain
factor investment, etc, seems to have a
lot of these dynamics. DMRS, the same thing, you get these really big for some factors pricing errors. Here's what we do and
I'm just going to show you the end result of our tests. We're going to formally test this with this GMM approach, this Bootstrap standard errors, and we're going to
do it in two ways. The red bars are for a bunch of different
haemolysis p-values. We're going to estimate on the one-month horizon and then we test on the other
horizons formally. You can do that. The other one, the blue bars are
where we estimate the constant parameters of the model on all
horizons jointly. Just to see if it could
perhaps still out-price it. The answer is on the
left, you see the market. The market is not rejected, because the market
prices itself. We're referring to
other horizons. But basically, all
the other models are, by and large, they're rejected
at the 5 percent level. A couple of them
that sneak above, but they're all rejected. Statistically
speaking, we reject these models when they're trying to account for
themselves at other horizons. Then we do something puzzling
because, statistically, you might think that if I
increase the complexity of my model, it makes more errors, but economically, I think you
might expect the opposite. If the sharp ratio of a model, the maximum sharp ratio
of a model increases, you should be getting
closer to the MVE portfolio and that should be
the right thing. You would maybe think
that as this max sharp is on the y-axis. As that increases, we get closer to the MVE portfolio,
which should maybe have smaller pricing
errors on average on the test asset which are
the factors themselves. If you press me, I'm pushing a line
through these points. It looks like it's
going the other way. The higher the sharp ratio is that the multi-month horizon, the higher the pricing errors are at the multi-period horizon. At least, from that perspective, that's
somewhat puzzling. Just a brief slide on this. These GMM tests always make
some people uncomfortable. One thing we're doing
is we're just doing a GRS test as well, which isn't formally a test of long horizon moment
but I'm just asking, hey, can I use
these instruments? The instrument here
is the z, m times r, that's a factor return
going h periods back. I estimate the MRIs is
going h peers back. Can I use that to manage to return to the original factors? This is all in the paper but I can run a standard GRS test. The outcome is, we'll reject all the models in this case, except actually Fama-French
Five volatility managed is not rejected. Although if you ask it to press the original Fama-French
Factors, it still is rejected. How big is the
rejection economically? We're using the information ratios you get from those tests. McKinley has this small
sample adjustment to get an unbiased
information ratio. The information ratios
that are left on the table are on the
order of 0.5 annually. It's a reasonably big number, that's left on the table. Then the question is, what's going on at some level? How are these models failing? The way we set up the test, there is a conditional model which is the second line here, where a_t and b_t
are time-varying. That one, there exists such a model that
prices the assets. We're going to use
multi-horizon returns to help estimate these b's and then the a_t is going to be nailed using the
conditional risk-free rate. We're going to get
that out there. If you apply the
conditional law on price, you have this expression
here that b_t effectively has to be
equal to the expected factor return divided
by its variance. Risk-free rate is also
there, that was not a big deal, divided
by its variance. It was never the case that actually these models
assume IID returns. They didn't do that,
but they assumed that expected return of
variances line up exactly. They've got to be proportional. The fact that we reject means
that they don't line up. That's what it really means. Now, we're going to
look at what does this variation look like? What we do, and this is a hard problem if you
have multi-factor models, we're going to take a
couple of shortcuts here to just illustrate, we're going to look at
the MVE combination of any given factor model. Take the in-sample MVE combination and just
look at that one. It's every model is a
one factor model now. Then we're going to
get an observed b_t. We could estimate the
conditional variance using an EGARCH on
that one model. That's reasonably accurate. Then we do the
realized MVE return. It's a noisy signal of
what b_t should have been. Then we're just going
to project it on an AR-12 type thing. I want to restrict
some parameters here. I'm going to just make
the two first lags. I'm going to allow
for some first and second-order
autocorrelation, and I'm going to have the
same coefficient on Lag 3-12. I just want to reduce a little
bit and get some of them. That's the returns or
these realized b_t's. We also add in the
conditional variance as a potential
explanatory variable. Then we take the conditional
expectation of this thing. What we're going to do is we're not going to run
a regression here, we're going to let those
coefficients be estimated by long-run returns
because we want to ask what is the information
in long-run returns? It could be some very
short-run IID dynamics that long-run returns
are not so sensitive to. The first thing that
happens if you do that, the red bars are our p-values again for the constant b case, and then the blue bars are the p-values for
the time-varying b. The point here that you
should take away from this is that, generally
speaking here, we do not reject anymore
with our new specification. I'll show you what these
look like in a second, but just to give you a sense, I can construct now the optimal timing of this MVE factor given
my estimated b_t's. I'm just doing this here
and I compare that to the Sharpe ratio of the MVE portfolio with the
constant b_t's, which is the blue
versus the red, and then the information ratio, what's left on the table from R. What you should observe, you should really look at
the blue here, which is the information ratios
of the rejected model, which is everything except
for the CAPM effectively, are in the order of 0.6-0.8. That's how we can improve
on this MVE portfolio. It's consistent
with the GRS test and that's the economic
magnitude we're going for. What does it look like?
Instead of plotting the b_t's, we decided to plot
the prices of risks, the conditional Sharpe ratio. That's the b_t times the standard deviation
of the factor. That's all this, but
it looks the same. It's just a little bit
more interpretable. What this plot is, is
actually just the average. It's the first principle
components across all models. It's just a straight
average price of risk across all models. We just want to get at
the big picture here. The average price of
risk here is 0.7, 0.8 across all these models. Obviously, it varies.
The yellow bars are our NBER
recession indicators. Something you can see here is that it looks like
the price of risk, the maximum Sharpe ratio, conditional Sharpe ratio
of these models is low in recessions,
which seems awkward. Not all recession. The 2,000 recession seems like
it was high actually. That was where these models would predict a very high one. It looks like maybe there's
something going on here, which we have to think about. Now, let me do it a
little bit more formally. I regressed this thing
on a recession indicator on the conditional variance
of the market portfolio, on the dividend price ratio
on the term spread and on the cross-sectional spread and Betas from the betting
S Beta for portfolio. All I wanted to see
is that is there some relation between the conditional
risk prices gotten from those models and some notion of cross-sectional
variation and some characteristic? We
would just Beta. We could have done
the value spread. I did something else
maybe. What do you get? The recessions are statistically significantly negatively related to the
conditional Sharpe ratio as given by these
long-run returns, and that doesn't really depend on the other
variables here, that's a pretty robust fact. The cross-sectional
heterogeneity, how much spread is there in Beta is actually positively related. I'm wishing we had the
value spread in here now. It makes some sense to think that maybe the price
risk gets high when there's a lot of difference
in the cross-section. The market variance, the
conditional variance of the market is negatively
related to the price of risk. The consistent with
my radar on your type thinking that what's going wrong here at some level
is that in recessions, maybe this variances spike
and expected returns just don't go one for one
with the variance. It is weakly positively related to the
dividend price ratio. That is not particularly
robust, actually, depending on the
regressors and by itself, for instance, it's
insignificant. What is robust seems that it is positively related
to the term spread. That's consistent with
somewhat similar models. The R-squared is only
9.6 percent, though. There's very little. There's ton of variation that
we're getting here. Maybe some of that is
noise, it could be, but there's a very low
R-squared relative to the stuff we're
used to seeing. At least, this exercise
indicates that there is some puzzling dynamics of the conditional risk price
from this standard models. That's basically
our paper as it is. As we conclude, the
literature typically thinks about one horizon at a time
and that's totally fine, and if you've got
that exactly right, there would be no valid
looking at multiple horizons, but we're seeing that if you don't have
it exactly right, looking at multiple
horizons at the same time is a conditional test
of the model as it. What I like about it too is
that we just use the model. We're not adding
additional assumptions, no auxiliary variables
are introduced, and they are all informative because
we're going to reject state of the art models with relatively high
information ratios. They're only asking themselves to price themselves,
so to speak. I would say, if I was to say something about the estimates of the conditional price of risk, they don't obviously look like
what I would have thought it would look like from
a classic risk model. We have substantial variation. Risk prices went from zero, negative 25 Sharpe
ratio to positive 2. There's a ton of variation
of the Sharpe ratio. It tends to be low in recessions and is low when
market variance is high, which most models would
obviously give you the opposite. It is positively related
to the term spread, but that said, most of the variation is not accounted for. 