Caroline M. Hoxby: I'd like
to start with some thanks to, for me this is I'm
really honored to be here today to give
the Feldstein lecture. I want to start with
some thanks First. I just want to thank the NBER. It's almost difficult
for me to thank the NBER because it's been
so important in my life. The first time I
showed up at the NBER was when I was an undergraduate
as a research assistant. I have never missed spending some time at the
NBER in any year since then. My first Summer
Institute was actually the year after I graduated from undergraduate school at Harvard when I was invited
to go to Summer Institute, it was still like Quincy
House at the time. Whenever I'm at the NBER, I was feeling that it's
my home away from home. It's been an incredibly
influential in my life, and I just cannot imagine having become an
economist without the NBER. But then also, I really want to say that I'm honored to give this lecture because it is in
honor of Martin Feldstein. Martin has been probably the single most influential
economist in my life. He was the first person to teach me college-level
economics. You taught me Principles
of Economics and first fact I believe I attended his first principles
of economics lecture. Don't look up the
date of that lecture. I also attended his last
principle of economics lecture. Because by then I was his
colleague at Harvard and we were colleagues for I
think 13 years at Harvard. I had him as an undergraduate, and I can still remember many things that he said in the two classes
I took from him, but especially his American
economic policy class. Believe it or not, I often
quote some of the things. I probably remember it
better than he does. I still quote some of
the things that he said, not just to my undergraduates but to my graduate students. I do give him
proper attribution. But then we serve
together as colleagues, we co-taught both graduate and undergraduate
public economics. I can tell you that I learned an enormous amount from
co-teaching with Martin. But also from just sitting in seminars with him every week and hearing the questions he asked and the way in
which he thought. He has a remarkably
incisive mind. He is really dedicated to
first principles in economics. He always sees the
big question in a question I never tire of hearing Martin's
comments and questions. I should say that for
all of you who may not have had as many opportunities to spend time with Martin, you can always spend
time with his papers. His papers are very much
like his beautiful mind. They are very clear. They go right to a point, and there is a reason
why so many of them are seminal papers in economics and especially in
public economics. Anyone who teaches
graduate public economics will teach many of
Martin's papers, and we'll know that
they are some of the easiest papers to
teach to PhD students, precisely because
people take away so much from them and
they're so influential. Thank you Martin for
all that you have done for me over the
years and in every way. I'm very honored to be giving the Feldstein
lecture today. What I'm going to talk
about today is that economics of the market for higher education in
the United States. I think that we have an incredibly unique
and exciting market for higher education here. One that is not only informative
about our own country, and maybe about highly developed
countries but is deeply informative about what happens
in tertiary education. I'm going to try to get
to all of that today. By the way, there's
a short disclaimer. Some of the slides are based on a paper that I gave last
year at Summer Institute. Many of you will have seen it. Therefore there's a disclaimer that this does not represent the views of the Treasury or the Internal Revenue Service. Let me just tell you
what I'm going to argue today to put it all out there because there are several pieces to the argument
that I'm going to make. The first part of the argument
that I'm going to make is that in our market
for higher education, we see a very strong
correlation between the educational resources
that a student experiences, and his or her
college readiness, which from now on
I'll just call CR. College readiness
is a combination of probably innate aptitude,
and also preparation. I'm just going to call it college readiness
so that you know, from now on it's just this
combination of probably ability and preparation
put together. This correlation between CR and educational
resources experienced is considerably stronger
in the parts of the market where market forces appear to be more powerful. I'll show you evidence of that. The next part of the talk
is going to be about the productivity of American post-secondary institutions. Over the past year, I have been working on measuring the productivity of every U.S post-secondary institution. What I'm going to do, is show you the
results of that work. I'll tell you a little
bit how I got there, but I'm mostly going to show you the results and then
show you that they have fairly strong implications for what must be going
on in this market. I am going to show you
that the productivity of a dollar of
educational resources, appears to be fairly
similar across all of the selective institutions
in the United States. From the most selective,
like Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Stanford,
University of Chicago, etc. To those that are
just selective, somewhat very
modestly selective. I'm going to suggest that market forces
may be the reason why we have very similar
productivity of a dollar. That doesn't mean they all
spend the same amount, but a dollar produces about the same amount of value-added. I'm also going to show
you that productivity of post-secondary
institutions appears to be lower and is much
more dispersed, much more different among the institutions that
are non-selective, and they appear to experience
much weaker market forces. I'll make an argument
that there's a connection between
those two things. If productivity in higher
education is important for growth point to
which I will come back at the very end of my talk. It may be a bit
of a problem that the US market for
higher education is largely expanding its enrollment in the non-selective tier. Where market forces appear to be weak and productivity
seems to be lower. Then finally, I'm going to
conclude by talking about the implications of all of
this for economic growth, and for income equality. Because if we take these
productivity results seriously, and we also take the
results seriously about the relationship between educational resources
and college readiness. Then it is almost impossible to escape
the suggestion that a particular model of education production applies
and tertiary education, and that that model
exhibits single crossing. Single crossing is the idea that people who have higher
college readiness, benefit more from any additional unit of
educational resources. Once you get that single
crossing condition, it has pretty profound
implications for economic growth, for potentially policy
in the tertiary world. Also, it has consequences
for income equality. I will try to get to all
of that in the talk today. I will probably speed up at some point as I flip
through the fingers. Part 1, I'm just going
to talk a little bit now about the US market
for higher education. Part of this is to remind you of what it
looks like because most of the people
in this room are not associated with
representative institutions. I will say that I
think the US has the only true market for
higher education in the world. You might disagree
with me a bit on this. But it is undoubtedly the
most informative market. The reason is that market forces still
dominate this market. It's not that the government
doesn't intervene. The government intervenes in numerous ways in our market
for higher education, but we do not have a
centrally controlled market. There's no national
government setting tuition. There is no national government
allocating students to different universities
or deciding which universities
should get resources, or faculty, or
anything like that. That really sets us apart even from our nearest counterparts, probably the United
Kingdom, Canada, etc. We really have a market that is dominated
by market forces. Our market exhibits
very strong variation. The top and the bottom look
nothing like one another. Where by top, the most
selective institutions, and by the bottom, I mean the non-selective
institutions. What I'm going to
show you is that the highly selective
end of the spectrum, the market is very integrated. In other words, the
institutions are competing with one another, and the same types of students are attending
these institutions. The market is relatively
well-informed. I would never say it's a
highly informed market, but students do know quite
a bit about schools, and schools know a
lot about students. It's mainly privately financed. By that, I mean that for the sources of revenue associated with
undergraduate education, most of those sources
are coming from the students themselves
or from their families. It's largely privately
financed at the top. The top are the most
selective schools are populated by
students who are, tend to be quite elastic
to institutions, academic, and other resources
in other words, they're sensitive
to whether you have a high faculty-student
ratio or low one, how nice the campus is, what classes are like
things like that. Finally, you will see
that it is characterized by very strong
assortative matching between the educational
resources at an institution and the
students college readiness. At the other end
of the spectrum, and the very non-selective end, almost the opposite
conditions prevail. In the middle, it's
in the middle. We'll get to look
at all of this, and I'm going to try
and show you evidence on each one of these pieces. Let me just quickly
review the market, especially because I know not everyone here
is an American, and even if you are,
you don't necessarily study higher education. There are about 7,500 post-secondary institutions
in the United States. About 1,000 of those
are selective. We have many that
are non-selective. We have three types
of governance, public, non-profit,
and for profit. Our institutions are very
autonomous compared to most post-secondary
institutions in the world. They get to choose
who they admit, what their tuition is, what their curriculum is, who they're going to hire
in terms of faculty, their salaries, how to
give up financial aid, how to raise money. That depends on whether you're a non-profit or for profit. But in any case they get to
choose all those things. Now I know some of you
are associated with public or state colleges
and universities, and you know that your schools are considerably
less autonomous. But by international standards, even public universities in the United States
are very autonomous. It is true that you may negotiate with your
state legislature over how to set
tuition or how to set in-state
out-of-state enrollment, but at least you're negotiating and you're not having it set
by the federal government. The US Department
of Education is not making those
decisions for you. Selective schools in
the United States tend to admit students
on a holistic basis. They don't just take account of one thing like a test score
and have sharp cutoffs. Nevertheless, test scores
are statistically by far the most powerful
indicator of how selective a school is and of a
student's college readiness. From now on, I'm just going
to say that a school is more selective if it has higher
median test scores, that is, it is just the statistical
predictor that matters. Net tuition in the United States is what you actually pay
if you're a student, that is not equal to the
list price or list tuition, and the difference there is financial aid, as we all know. But list tuition is
also not equal to the educational resources
that a student experiences, and that can differ because of state appropriations and
public universities, or in non-profit
universities that usually gifts to the endowment
or current use gifts that separate those two things. It's important to realize those are not all the same thing. What you pay for tuition is not the educational
resources you experience. As Jim Perturb pointed
out in the introduction, the most selective
schools which have very high resources per student, are strikingly often free
for low-income students. It tells you that net prices and educational resources
can really be very different from one another. We do have federal
intervention in the US, but it is mainly in the form of portable grants, in other words, you can take them to any
college or university, subsidized loans and tax
credits and tax deduction. I'm not going to be
talking a lot about the federal government today. I like to think of the US post-secondary market
as a market in which there are many
price distortions or price interventions, but it's still not
centrally controlled. That's how I'd like you
to think about it today. Just reviewing some of my previous work
which we need to load up so that we can understand some of the other things
that I'm talking about. In about 1875, I would describe the US higher
education as autarchic. Most people just went to
the most local institution, or one of two local institutions
or something like that. After that, it
became significantly more geographically integrated, and this was particularly true for students with high
college readiness. You'll see in a moment that
it's still not terribly integrated for students
with low college readiness. Also a lot of this
integration took place immediately after World War II, between about 1950 and 1970 when testing
became standardized, financial aid became
standardized and people started to realize, Oh, I'm really ready for college or I'm really
not ready for college, and colleges were
able to start to find the students
who suited them. As the market became
more integrated, the students with
high degrees of college readiness
tended more and more to attend the institutions that had the most
resources per student, and I will show you that. It's quite a dramatic change. Many of the students with high college
readiness could pay, but many of them also
could not pay for the educational resources that they would have experienced
at those schools. That is really the beginning
of serious financial aid, as these schools reach
out to low-income, high-achieving students and find ways to make school affordable. This was achieved by having increasingly large subsidies at selective institutions
and their students are by far the most
subsidized students. I may come back to
that point again because I think it
confuses people a lot, but a lot of the most
selective institutions subsidize their
educational resources the most for students, although at least at private universities,
the private non-profits, the students pay it
back later in life when they ask them for
their alumni donations. It's not free. But
the consequence was that the correlation between parental income and
educational resources fell over this long
period of time. Let me just show you some data on the things that I said. This is the percentage
of students who apply to a post-secondary
institution that's at least 250 miles
distant from their home. I'm going from 1950-2010. The top set of dots is for the students who
had the highest aptitudes, students at the 90th percentile or above on college assessments, then I have median
aptitude students and marginally
prepared students. What you can see is that the students who had
a very high degree of college readiness switched from being largely in Autarky. They were just attending
their local institution to nearly all of them are applying to at
least one institution that is at least
250 miles distance, so that they're in a geographically integrated
market these days. If I do something more
sophisticated and I estimate a statistical
model of college choice, so this would be something like a conditional logic model. A pretty big model of post-secondary
choice where I can take into account all of the characteristics
of the students and the characteristics of the colleges and then the
match between those things. What do I see? Well, I see that distance is decreasing in importance
for college choice. That the match between
my own college readiness as a student and the college readiness
of the peers I would experience at a school is
increasing in importance, and that my parents
ability to pay for the school's
educational resources is decreasing in importance. That would be true if I do these pretty
sophisticated statistical models of college choice. But all of these
changes are much more dramatic for students with
high college readiness, and they are not at
all dramatic for students who are marginally
prepared for college. The next thing I
want to show you is how much the sorting of students and educational
resources changed over time. The earliest year
I can show you is 1967 for reasons of data. Let's have a look at that. On the horizontal axis is an institution's per student
instructional resources. What I've done is I've
given each school the number of seats it had in 1967 and then just ranked them. At the far right-hand of the horizontal axis are the schools that have the highest per student
instructional resources, and if the top school
had 1,000 seats, that's how many rank
places it's allocated. On the vertical axis, I've done something very
similar except what I've ranked as students in terms
of their college readiness. Again, I've just taken
students in order and rank them from the
top scoring students to the bottom scoring students. If the top scoring student
went to the school that had the highest instructional
resources per pupil, and then we went down like that, rank, what we would see was
just the 45 degree line. We do not see the
45 degree line. In fact, what we see is that students college readiness and instructional resources don't
seem very closely related. Although there's a
little indication here on the right-hand
side that there is some positive
relationship as you get towards the schools that have the highest
instructional resources. Let me show you the same chart with the same schools in it. For 2013, you can see that there is a lot more assortative matching. Essentially the students with
high college readiness are going to the schools that have high instructional
resources. There's an enormous
increase in the matching between students
college readiness and schools
instructional resources. Although you will notice
that if you look at the bottom left-hand
corner of this chart, as you get into the
schools that have lower instructional
resources and the students with lower
college readiness, it starts to look again
a bit like a cloud. There's not really much
of a relationship there. This is the most selectives, or most of you spend most of your time,
the very selectives. The selectives, and these
are the non-selective here, just to give you a sense of where they are on this chart. In fact, this
non-selective group in the two charts that I showed
you in 1967 and 2013, I showed you a panel of schools so that I was
holding the schools constant and I wasn't really expanding the schools
that I was looking at. That was to be fair in terms of the comparison over time. But in fact, this
group down here has really expanded
enormously over time. This is where most of the
enrollment expansion in the US has occurred. Let's have a look at that
quickly just so that we can put some things
in perspective. This is the growth
of enrollment of the non-selective
sector since 1967. The way I've divided selective and non-selective
here is to say that you're a selective
school only if you ask students to submit test
scores, grades, and letters. They at least recommend them when you submit
your application. That's one way of thinking of what a selective school is. You can see that now the non-selectives by that criterion totally dominate enrollment
in the United States. Another way of deciding
where the dividing line is between selective and
non-selective is to look at schools that call themselves
open enrollment schools. These are schools
that really don't even require you to apply. You just walk in the
door and as long as you can pay you are enrolled. Again, you'll see this
enormous expansion in the open enrollment. It's not quite as dramatic, but you can still see
that's the part of the US post-secondary market
that is expanding fastest, is the non-selective part. I want you to keep that in mind throughout everything else that we're going to be
talking about today. That was just a bit of history
to get us to up to today. Now, I want to make
the points that I described earlier in my
introduction in the motivation. The highly and
non-selective parts of the market differ in all of these ways that
I described earlier. Now I've already shown you
evidence on two of them, so I'm not going
to show you again that there's a big
increase in the degree of assorted of matching and that students' sensitivity
to institutions resources has
increased over time. I mentioned that already with these longitudinal studies but I am going to try to
make the rest of the points for you here quickly. What does the US post-secondary
market look like today? Well, what this
is showing you is the enormous difference in instructional resources
per pupil between the most selective schools
on the one hand and the least selective
schools on the other. It's really very dramatic. What we have at the top end of the selectivity distribution
is schools that have instructional spending
just under a $100,000 per pupil and core spending of
around a $150,000 per pupil. Core spending adds to
instructional spending. Students support,
academic support, and institutional support. It doesn't really matter which of the two measures you use. As you can see, they go up
together very smoothly. At the low end of the
selectivity distribution, we have schools where instructional spending
and core spending are under $10,000 a year, $5,000 a year, $4,000 years-all
is quite common. Mind you that these
are not tuition, this is what they're actually spending to educate a student. I'm going to show you a
slightly different version of this chart in one moment. I want to emphasize that on
the horizontal axis here because you're going
to see a lot of charts that have the same
horizontal axis. What I have here is the institution's median
SAT combined score. That's the math plus
the verbal score. Institutions are binned
in 20 point categories. It's the institutions that are shown here not the students. Just to be clear, if you happen to be a
student and you're attending a school that has a median
SAT score that's below yours, you're with your institution. It's the institutions
that are being shown , not individual students. The SAT does not give out score points in a way that is even in terms
of percentiles. The SAT is designed so that
it is more sensitive over the range in which students
are very college ready. As a result, if I were to show this same chart and just
use national percentile, so this is exactly
the same chart but I've now changed the
horizontal axis to national percentiles
instead of the SAT score, you will see that things
look much more compressed. That's telling you that a
lot of the action among the most selective
institutions is up just in the top few percentiles of
the test score distribution. I'm going to continue
to show you charts with the SAT score on the
horizontal axis. I'm doing that because the selective institutions
are interesting. I want you to be able to see the interesting action and
not have it all crowded up on the right-hand side
of each one of the figures. That was instructional resources and core student
resources per student. We saw that it was dramatically different among institutions. I'm now going to look
at some measures of competition and integration and show you that they are also dramatically different
among institutions. I have four different measures of competition and integration. The first one is just
the average number of applications filed by an
institution's students. You can see that the least
selective institutions most students are just applying
to that students school. Just one application is filed. Whereas at the most competitive, most selective schools,
what we see is students on average submitting
10 applications. Very big difference there. Another measure would
just be the share of an institution's students who applied only to that school. They really never considered another school very seriously. It's not clear that school A and just needs to
compete with school B. You will see that, again among the
non-selective institutions with the least selective ones, most of the students are only
applying to that school, whereas that behavior is extremely uncommon for the
most selective institutions. Another measure
of competition or integration might be whether school A has to
compete with schools outside of its own
little commuting zone. Is it only competing with
other local institutions? Well, this just
shows you the share of competing applications. In other words,
applications submitted by my students to other schools that are to institutions
in another commuting zone. Again, you can see that
this goes up very steeply as we go from the
least selective to the most selective
institutions. If instead of looking
at a commuting zone, which is a pretty small area, I look instead at applications submitted to an institution
in another state. You can see that that also
goes up very steeply as we go from the least to the
most selective institutions. By all measures of what
we would think of as integration or competition
with other institutions, the least selective
don't look like they have much competition, they're just maybe
competing with a few local institutions. The most selective
look like they're in a very integrated
national market where they have to compete for students with all the other
institutions potentially. That was competition
and integration. Now let me show you a little
bit about information. Probably the best measure of whether we have very
much information about a school is whether
the institution provides information
to something called the common dataset. The common dataset is one
dataset that is gathered by a consortium to be used for all of the college guides
in the United States. It's used for Barons guides
and the Peterson's Guide, and it's used by US News and
World Report and so on it. It is so that schools can provide comparable
information to all of these different
organizations and so that they don't have to provide
it time and time again. You'll notice that the least
selective institutions, none of them are
really participating in the common dataset. In fact, it's quite difficult to find information about them. Go and try on the web and what you will find is
they'll say lots of wonderful positive
things about themselves. But then when you try to get down to the
nitty-gritty, well, tell me about how much
you spend on this, what's your faculty
student ratio? How many of your faculty
have graduate degrees? What are your students graduation rates in
different programs? You won't find that
kind of information. On the other hand, the most selective schools
in the United States, a 100 percent of them are participating in
the common dataset. We can find out lots of
information about them and it's all in the college guides with which we're familiar. I also note that here you
can really begin to see this break between the selective and
non-selective schools. There's this very
steep increase in the participation in
the common dataset in a range between about 900 combined on the SAT and about 1,100
combined on the SAT. Keep that range in mind because it'll show up on
some other figures as well as being the
dividing line between the non-selective
and the selectives. Finally, I want to
show you the share of undergraduate revenue
that is paid by students. Because I think students
have an incentive to internalize the effects of their education on their
own human capital, on their later earnings, on
their later life outcomes, when they are paying for their
undergraduate education. They may have less
of an incentive to do that when someone else, a third party is paying for their undergraduate
education. What do I mean when I say
it is paid by students? Well, perhaps it's
easiest to think of what is not paid by students. If I'm getting a
government grant, I am not paying
for that directly. I'm never going to
have to repay that. If I have a loan and I'm
going to default on it, or I'm just not going
to pay it back under one of the income-based
repayment schemes, that counts as not being paid. I'm counting those as students who are not paying either. Or if my tuition is being subsidized by
state appropriations, I'm not going to pay that back. As you can see, if we
look at this chart again, what we can see is that at least selective and only
about 40 percent of undergraduate related revenue is really coming from students themselves whereas
at the top end it's close to 100 percent. Now this top end is
actually a funny thing because as many of you
know, in this room, who teach at non-profit
universities that are very selective, those students tend
to be subsidized by income from the endowment
and other donations. But for the purposes of thinking through the
incentives here, I think we're going
to count that as money that is
paid by students, partly because
they themselves do actually make the
donations later in life. But also because the institution has a strong incentive to internalize the effects of its own education on its
students later outcomes, because those later
outcomes are what determine the inflow of later
donations or revenue. From the economic
incentives point of view, we're going to count it as money that ends up getting
paid by students. Finally, I'll just note before I leave this topic
that the share of undergraduate revenue paid by students does not differ a lot, among the most
selective institutions, they all have a lot of their undergraduate
revenue paid by students. But once you go down
to the non-selective, it's all over the place, so what I'm showing you
here is the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile of the share of undergraduate
revenue paid by students. If you know very much about
the non-selective part of the market for education in
the United States you will recognize that this is the incredible diversity
of our non-selective. On the one hand, we have
non-selective institutions that are extremely demanding. They're often for
profit institutions. They give out certificates and other credentials that are
very valuable to employers. We have a bunch of these
in Silicon Valley and they charge a lot of money and they expect students
to pay for that. Most of the students who go to those schools pay for
their own degrees. On the other hand, we have also for-profits still sticking with the for-profits
theme for a moment. Also, we have for-profits where almost 100 percent of their revenue is coming
from federal grants, and the grants that are given to military veterans in
the United States, and they would be down at
the 10th percentile where almost none of the students are paying for their own
undergraduate education. They're both types
of for-profits. Actually the public institutions
tend to sit someplace in closer to the median there. The non-selective part
of the market for higher education in
the United States is incredibly diverse. It is not like the most
selective end where you could say the schools are not
quite interchangeable, but they're close to being interchangeable at
the non-selective, and they are far from
being interchangeable, and that is a theme
that we will see again. So far I've just reviewed where the market for
higher education is. Now let me show you what
I think of as being the new and to me
surprising and maybe even very surprising results. What I have been
working on now for about a year is measuring the productivity of
post-secondary institution, so what do I mean
by productivity? I mean the productivity of a dollar of
educational resources, so the numerator is going
to be the causal increase in lifetime earnings that is triggered by enrolling
in the institution. This I'm going to
call value-added. I realize that
post-secondary institutions don't just increase earnings, but we're going to put
that aside for right now. We're only going to
think about value-added in terms of lifetime earnings. In the denominator will be the causal increase in lifetime educational spending that is triggered by enrolling
in the institution, I'll call that
social investment, and notice that both of these
are longitudinal concepts. Not just the first one, the lifetime increase
in earnings, but also if I go to a specific college and
then that triggers me to not only go
to that college, but also maybe to go
to graduate school or go and get a professional certificate or
something like that, that will be included also
in social investment. It's not just what happened to pay out of
pocket at the beginning, it has all the educational
resources that get devoted to me longitudinally is going
to be in the denominator, so it's very important
that we have longitudinal data for both. The main problem for measuring the productivity of
post-secondary institutions is the bias that arises through vertical and
horizontal selection. Vertical selection is the
problem that different schools enroll students who differ in terms of their
college readiness, so it is not
reasonable to compare, a Tulane University to, which is very selective to a local community college and say that the difference in the students earnings
just has to do with the difference in
value-added between Tulane and that
community college. It's just not true, they're admitting
students who have very different levels
of college readiness, so they probably
would have earned something quite
different anyway, and dealing with that is the primary problem in trying
to measure productivity. There also is a horizontal
problem which is non-trivial, and that is that if you
were to compare Tulane, which is located in Louisiana, to an equally selective
school that is located in a labor market that
has much higher earnings, you might end up making a false apples to oranges
comparison again, and that's because even if these schools enroll students who are equal in
college readiness, they still could differ
in other ways in terms of their labor markets
and other ways that might affect their earnings. I'm going to try to deal
with both of those problems. I'm not going to go into the nitty-gritty of
the method here today. Although please feel free
to read the papers and also feel free to ask
me about them because I like to talk about
the nitty-gritty. What's the method
from a 1,000 feet? Well, I tried to think
through experiments. I really wanted to
put the method in terms of experiments
that people could understand and that made sense, and I'll also explain to you
later why it is that I like this method rather
than just trying to control for students test
scores or something like that. The method deals with
vertical selection by finding each school's on the
bubble range and admission. On the bubble means
that the students are just maybe going to be
admitted, maybe not. It's the range where the school
is almost flipping coins between whether the student gets admitted and does
not get admitted, and I'm going to treat
the students who are in the bubble range as randomized
by the admission staff, and the result is that I get thousands and thousands,
tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands,
I'm not sure, but many thousands of A versus B experiments where college
B is just a little less selective than
college A. I was on the bubble at college A.
I didn't get admitted. I go to college B, and it's only a little
less selective. That's what you get
from those experiments, and I'm going to
deal with horizontal selection by finding students who are choosing among colleges that are in an indifferent set. In other words, they're very similar on selectivity grounds. They may look extremely similar, and it looks like the student
is the one who's just flipping a coin at
the end of the day. I'm going to treat those
students as randomizing among the schools in his or
her in different set, and that's going
to give me lots of A versus C experiments
where colleges, A and C, have very similar students, and those are
usually schools that are geographically
approximate to one another or that
look very similar on numerous other criteria. Then I take paired
comparison methods and I combine the
results of all of these pairwise
experiments to obtain value-added and social
investment that is free of selection
bias as possible. Now, paired comparison
methods are probably most familiar to all
of you through sports, because they are used
to rank tennis players, they are used to
rank chess players. They are used to
give us the ranking. They're used to do rankings
of college football teams, all things like that, so this turns out to be exactly the same
statistical problem, although it's actually
easier to use it to derive value-added than it
is to rank football teams, and the reason is, we
don't have to worry about home field advantage,
things like that. Just to summarize the method, I'm going to gather
all the differences in earnings and social
investment from all of the vertical
experiments involving students who are
on the bubble at some selective school unexposed to randomization by
the admission staff. Notice that I really need the longitudinal
data here to get the social investment
differences as well as the
earnings differences. I'm going to gather
all the differences in earnings and
social investment for all the horizontal
experiments like to colleges that look very
similar to one another, involving students
who choose between equally selective schools, and I'm going to combine all
the experimental results using paired
comparison techniques. I should say I'm using
population data, I'm using administrative data, this is not sampled data. I'm looking at every student's
application portfolio, so there are hundreds of
thousands of these experiments. What are the strengths and
limitations of this method? The first strength, of course, is the purpose. I
went in with it. I'm trying to remove
selection bias and I think a lot of the selection bias
is removed by this method. The second strength is the
one that I have become convinced is the
most important one, and that is the common
support is always fulfilled. I am never comparing two schools without thinking about
a student who would actually be choosing between those two schools potentially. None of these experiments
is saying what would happen to John Smith if he went to MIT when
John Smith could never get into MIT or
would never consider MIT. MIT had to be in his application portfolio,
and furthermore, he always had to have been a
very plausible MIT student, so that common support I have become convinced is really
why it is that this method, I think works better than just controlling for something
like test scores. In addition, there's no
functional form at all imposed on the
relationship between value-added and
college readiness. Again is an advantage vis a vis simple linear controls
or something like that, and it's pretty obvious
which assumptions need robustness tests. It's basically how I
find the bubble range? This is really the main thing that needs robustness checking. There is a big limitation
to this method, which is not just this method, but almost any method that
would attempt to do this. There is probably no general fix for the selection problem of I go to a non-selective
institution versus I don't go to a
post-secondary school at all. Everyone in this room is
aware of the literature on what is the return to
enrolling in college, and that's about these
marginal students who are just on that margin. But most of the fixes that
we know for that problem are very specific to a
certain of institutions, they may be local to a
certain set of conditions. They may be in
historical artifact. It's a natural experiment, it's a policy experiment. None of them are general fixes
that I could use broadly. What I'm going to do is
I'm going to show you productivity relative to the least selective
institutions, and I will not attempt
to tell you how productive the least
selective institutions are relative to their
near alternatives, which are things like a
student perhaps going into the military or doing
on the job training or engaging in some
credentialing program that is not considered a post-secondary
program in the US. Now let me build up the productivity numbers. I'm going to start
by just showing you wage and salary
earnings through Age 32. This is not value-added, this is just raw wage
and salary earnings. This is for the cohort who graduated from
high school in 2001. They're about Age 32 and the last year earnings data
in which I observe them. I've just counted
everything back to Age 18 using a two-and-a-half
percent real discount rate and I can show you various other discount
rates in the paper. But what you can see
is what you would expect students who go to institutions that
have higher math and verbal SAT scores. In other words, they're
more selective, have higher wage and
salary earnings. That part of that maybe the
institutions value-added. But of course, part of that is the fact that they also just had higher college readiness before they were admitted to school. You'll see that the
difference is quite large. It's about $500,000
in difference between the least selective and the most selective
institutions. Just to give you a sense
again of where they are. The most selective
in the top bubble, very selective, selective, and non-selective depending
on how you cut it, is between about 700 and
950 something like that. Now let's do it through Age 65. Obviously, I can't observe
the high-school graduate and cohort of 2001
through Age 65. What I did was I observed
them up through Age 32, and then from Age 33 onwards, I projected their earnings
in a few different ways using administrative earnings
data from the Treasury. This is my preferred projection. But again, if you
look at the papers, you can see a variety
of other ways. It's not going to matter
very much except for the very top group is quite effected
by which type of projection method I use. Now, you might say, this looks just like
the other chart, but notice that
the vertical scale is now quite different. The top of the vertical
scale is no longer 800,000, but 8 million. Again, this is a
discounted back to age 18 using a two-and-a-half
percent real discount rate. Through Age 65, lots and lots of earnings. Again, this is still
just earnings. This is not a value-added. Let's look at the same chart and put value-added in there. Now the value-added numbers are coming out of that method
that I described earlier, where I'm trying to take account of vertical and
horizontal selection. You can see that value-added
is also increasing pretty much monotonically with an
institution selectivity, but it's not increasing as nearly as faster
rate as Roth earnings, and this is particularly obvious if we look out on
the right-hand side, where the institutions
are very selective, a lot of the earnings of those students is due to the
fact that they were just very college ready
in the first place and they would have always had pretty high earnings. That so that you can see
value-adding does go up, but it's just not
nearly as fast. Also notice that this
is a normalization. I do not know the value added of the least
selective institutions, so I have just normalized
it to be zero. Therefore, this normalization is not completely innocuous, which is something
I could discuss. But you should keep
in mind that the value-added is just
normalized to zero for the lowest value
added institutions that's not truly zero. I
don't know that it's zero. It could be negative because it could be that
it's worse to go to a low selectivity
institution then to go into the military or to do on the job training or
something like that. It's not necessarily
a positive number. That's value-added and
lifetime earnings. Now, that's the numerator. Let's look at the
denominator now, this is lifetime
social investment in post-secondary education. Remember that this
is longitudinal. If you keep going to
school longer and longer, you're going to have more and more of this social investment. That's exactly what we see. Social investment
is quite low for students who are going to
the least selective schools. That's because not only
are they going to schools that don't spend very much
on them in the first place, but they don't tend to stay
very long in those schools. Whereas it's very high around $600,000 even when
discounted back to Age 18, using the same discount rate for the students who attend the
most selective institution. Again, that's because
they're going to schools that spend more money
on their education and they stay longer in
school consequently. What we have is a race between the numerator and
the denominator? We know that the numerator value-added is
rising as we go to more and more selective schools
but also the denominator is rising as we go to more
and more selective schools. Which of the two
is going to win? This next chart shows you. When I first saw this chart, this totally shocked me. I have to say, in fact, it changed the whole
nature of my interest in this topic because I had not expected it to look
like this at all. It changed what I thought I
ought to be thinking about. I won't tell you what I
expected it to look like. That's probably not a
good way to set you up, but it's just this
is what it looks like and this was not
what I had expected. What does this say? This is my characterization
of this is that it's flat and a little lower
at the non-selective. Then it's rising in this area where we're on the border between the non-selective
and the selective. That's pretty flat again. What does this say? This says that a dollar of educational resources
is generating about the same value added for the only mildly
selective institutions and the most selective
institutions. Yet, as you saw in
previous figures, these institutions
differ enormously in terms of
educational resources. Just enormously in terms of educational
resources per student. It's not obvious that a dollar
at Harvard or Stanford, or University of
Chicago should produce the same amount
of value-added as the dollar at a school that's only very marginally selective, just a little bit
above non-selective. That's the first thing
to take away from this. That is a very striking result, very very striking result. Then the non-selective or
less productive, again, don't take too
seriously the fact that they're below the zero axis, that's really the normalization, we just know that
they're less selective. Than less productive with a dollar than the
selective institutions. That was the average. This is showing you
some dispersion. What you'll notice is that there isn't that much dispersion and productivity among the various
selective institutions, all of the dispersion starts to grow as we get into the middle
of the selectivity band, and then it just explodes as we get into the non-selective. That shouldn't surprise you because you may
recall earlier that I showed you that the
non-selective we're a very diverse group. But what this is showing you is that their productivity is also very very diverse. We can talk through
the exact magnitudes. When I first saw this, I thought, oh, this
can't be right. Then I actually looked
at lots of examples, I thought, oh, no,
this can be right. But they're very
very diverse group in terms of their productivity. Whereas you can see it that
the most selective schools, I know we all make
a big deal out of which one you go to, but it's not a big difference. Let's assess where we are. The productivity for a
dollar of social investment tends to be flat across a
wide range of selectivity. As I said, this is striking
because these schools have very different educational
resources and it suggests that somehow the resources are scaling up with college
readiness in such a way that there are no easy gains
to be made by taking a dollar from one
selected school and sending it to another
selective school. There's some gains to
be made by doing that, but it's not as though
if I took dollars from Harvard and allocated them to Ohio State
or something like that, it doesn't look like
much what happened. It doesn't mean that all
the selective schools make maximally productive
use of their resources. It could be that they're
just similarly inefficient, which is what I think based
on being a professor. Also, where we are relative to the least
selective institutions, the productivity of a dollar is really sufficiently
positive at the selective institutions
that the fact that they have additional resources
seems like a good investment. I mean, if you looked
at the numbers on the vertical axis, it looks like for every dollar that is being spent at
those institutions, it is generating multiple
dollars of value added. That makes it look like
they're all good investments unless we really normalized
things incorrectly. I don't think we could have done that as incorrectly as
it would need to be. We also have concluded that
less selective institutions are less productive on average, but their productivity
is also much more dispersed so that
students can make quite big mistakes by choosing a non low-productivity one instead of a high
productivity one there. They're often next to one another in the same
commuting zone. It's not obvious what the
differences between them all. This is potentially problematic because the non-selective, so as we saw earlier,
expanding much faster than this electives and they are
less productive on average. Also it's just easier
to make mistakes. It's hard to say,
as I've emphasized, whether the non-selective
institutions are good investment vis-a-vis
other alternatives. We've already seen quite a bit of evidence that predictors have strong market forces prevail
among selective schools, but not among the non-selective. We can also test further this idea that there may
be a connection between productivity and market
forces by looking at similarly selective
schools and seeing whether the same predictors are
correlated with productivity. I'm just going to be clear
that what I'm about to do is not causal, it's
just correlational. It's suggestive, but
I think it does. It is suggestive about the relationship between market
forces and productivity. I just ran regression where the dependent variable was an institution's productivity,
which I measured. I dump it out, the school's median test
score in these 20 bins. Selectivity is now out. I put in as the
covariates of interests, some of those measures
I showed you before of integration and competition, my information measure and the share student related
revenue paid by students. All three of these types of measures, the more competitive, the more integrated
the school is, the more informed
people are about it and the larger the share of its student revenue
that's paid by students. It's all are positively
correlated with productivity, I should emphasize again,
this is a correlation. It's only suggestive evidence, but it does suggest there
may be a connection between. Finally, let me get
in my last minutes to the economic implications
of all of this. Because I think
we want to take a big step back and say, okay, now we've learned some
interesting things about the US market
for higher education, but what are the big lessons and why does this matter to
the economy more broadly? Well, I'm going
to take a little, it'll seem like a short
digression and say, because we need to understand
what economic model could explain all of the phenomenon that
we've seen so far. I'm not going to
claim that this is the only economic model, but it seems to me like it
is the most concise one. If corrected has important
implications and it's the model that I think
is probably right myself. Here's the simple model
I'm going to propose. There's going to
be single crossing in the productivity of educational resources
and college readiness. Just to remind you what is single crossing in this context, it basically means here on will be very familiar
to a lot of you. College readiness is my CR, R is my educational resources. P is just going to be the undistorted price
of an institution before tuition subsidies
and things like that. What single crossing says
is that this function, which I've defined here as M, is monotonic in
college readiness. That just means a
student who has higher college readiness
is always willing to pay more for unit of educational resources
than a student with lower college readiness. That's a familiar
condition to us in many other settings, but we often don't think of it. With regard to colleges
and universities. Just go back to my simple model. I have single crossing. Students are going to maximize the return on
educational investments. Students are insensitive to arbitrary features
like geography so that all the institutions are
well integrated into the market and
students are fully informed and not
liquidity constraints. This is a an obviously
ideal setting. If that is the model, what happens, then
what would we see? We would see that student
choices and market forces. We'll generate an
assortativitily matched allocation in which students who have higher
college readiness are paired with more
educational resources. Here's the crucial thing. Each dollar of
resources will generate the same value-added and
institutions will be pressured to be x-efficient
or productively efficient. You may recognize that this is the same type of market equilibrium that we get in a lot of other settings. For instance, this is
really the same as a TBI equilibrium in
a local public goods. We get the same
types of results. We get stratification. That means we get
some schools which have students with higher
college readiness than others. There's a stratified
equilibrium. We get positive
assorted matching between college readiness
and educational resources. We get allocative efficiency. The returned to a dollar is pretty equal
across institutions. We get productive efficiency that's forcing the
institutions to be more productive with a dollar of
educational resources. We get a standard
condition there that you get in all of
these types of models. Now, how does this model
help me understand the data? Well, I would apply it to the selective schools
where it's assumptions don't fit but they don't
outrageously not fit either. I think it helps
us to understand why we see the
equilibrium that we see for the selective schools where we see this
stratification, we see the assorted of matching. It looks like we see
pressure to have productivity that is very similar across a
range of schools, productivity of a dollar. We just say it doesn't
really apply to the non-selective schools where none of the assumptions
seem to fit. We have weak integration,
we have weak competition, we have poor information, a low degree of self pay, and we have students who
just aren't willing to look outside their zip code or
a couple of zip codes. If that is the model, by the way, as I said, I found this results
somewhat surprising. But once I ingested
them, I said, this model really does explain part of what it
is that we're seeing. It made me think that students who I never think
of as flexible, rational, informed, interchangeable
investors may actually be better investors
than I had thought. What are the implications
of a model like this? The first implication
is that to make its maximum contribution to grow a higher education
sector in an economy, needs to allow
educational resources to scale up with
college readiness. Now, that may seem obvious because that's what we
happen to do in the US, but actually in most
countries in the world, educational resources are
kept very similar across students who have
high degrees of college readiness and low
degrees of college readiness. It is not popular necessarily with people to suggest that there should be these
vast differences in educational
resources per student. No other country has
this spectrum with incredibly high
educational resources at one end and quite modest educational resources
at the other end. That is unique to the US, that top tail of the
distribution does not exist in other countries. The extent of scaling up
is quite unique to the US. It may mean that we have
educational resources contributing more
to economic growth in this country than
in other countries. Precisely because we allow
that top tail to exist. Where educational resources, huge educational
resources are paired with students who have
very high degrees of college readiness. Elsewhere, Phillipa
Aghion have argued that top US research universities
are unusually productive. They tend to be standouts
and research but it may be that we have
a whole tail of universities that are able
to be productive with very high educational
resources and contribute a very disproportionate
amount to economic growth. All of this would be
exacerbated if you have a model like the
model of Acemoglu, Aghion, Zilibotti, which says that in a
highly developed country, economic growth is unusually propelled or disproportionally
propelled by innovation. That higher education
contributes disproportionately
to innovation, as opposed to say,
imitation of technology, we often think of education doing a variety of
different things. But highly advanced education might contribute very
disproportionately to innovation. That would suggest
that we should really be paying
attention to whether our post-secondary sector is organized in a way that's
efficient for economic growth. Well, all of post-secondary
investments may actually be earning high returns
relative to alternatives. I don't dismiss that
possibility because my normalization doesn't
tell me anything about that. Reallocating students
and resources from the least productive schools to the more productive schools is an obviously pro growth thing. If you go think back to that productivity
chart where we saw how dispersed productivity was for the non-selective
institutions. Just moving students from the least productive
non-selective institutions to the more productive
non-selective institutions might
be a good thing. It seems like it would be very pro growth and policies that facilitate market forces in
higher education, such as better information, better competition
financing that makes students in schools
internalize the consequences of their choice may also be pro growth because it
may promote productivity in this very important
sector that potentially contributes to the
economy through innovation and through
a lot of other ways. That's all about
economic growth. At the end of the day
I do come down on this idea that there is something special about the US market
for higher education, that it may be
incredibly vital to American economic growth that we should not take
it for granted, that we have this
unusual setting, that we should not take
it for granted that we have these
institutions that are incredibly highly resourced and that are fortunate enough to not only have the high
aptitude people from the US, but have high
aptitude people from around the world engaging with those educational
resources that may be a very special part
of our economy. However, that same model also has implications
for income equality. This is where I'm going
to stop because I think it's important to. If there is strong single crossing between
college readiness and educational resources
and tertiary education, what is good for growth? In other words, that
enormous assorted of matching may be very bad
for income equality. It says you come into college with high
college readiness, you're already going to have pretty high earnings even if I don't give you very many
educational resources. But guess what? I'm going to pair you
with huge amounts of educational resources as
opposed to very modest. Well, even if all schools are equally productive
with a dollar, some schools have a
lot more dollars. Some students experience
a lot more dollars. That is not great
for income equality. It sounds like we're
doomed, but perhaps not. It's worth remembering
that college readiness is partly due to primary
and secondary education. It's not just innate aptitude. It's all those kids who go to elite high schools
in the United States. Then we'll all start out
that elite at birth, there probably is something
to the schools they go to. There's lots of
reason to think that educational resources
may be more productive in early
childhood programs that serve the disadvantaged
than the advantaged. It is not the case
that single crossing necessarily has to
work the same way for early childhood education. Say, it could go the other way. But I think what it tells us is that if we want to grow fast, we should feel extra
pressure to make all of our students have high
college readiness so that we don't have these big gaps and college readiness
as they go into tertiary education where I think this strong single
crossing applies. With that, I'm
going to stop and I would be delighted
to take questions. 