Denis Sosyura: To start us off, I'd like to point out that
all of modern finance, both in delegated
asset management and in corporate finances, based on the principle of separation of
ownership and control, where selected
managers is one of the most important tasks
for the shareholders. We hope that this paper provides some insights to
the question of, how do we pick high
type managers? Then this paper,
we're going to argue that in sentence with
high entry barriers, such as management professions
or fraud management, family descent can serve as a valuable signal of
managerial quality. Here's the argument that we
will advance in the paper. Main idea is that if a
manager is born rich, or if an individual
is born rich, they can become a manager through their wealth,
inherited status, professional networks
without necessarily being a high type or
being highly skilled. Think of an extreme
example of a son of a CEO who becomes the next CEO of a
family-owned business simply because he's inherited
with families status. On the other hand, if a
manager is born poor, they need to really go through multiple selection
thresholds in order to get to that high stage of entering a highly selective
managerial fields. They face higher entry barriers, so the only the ones
that are able to exceed these multiple
high entry barriers are able to enter
into the profession. Therefore managers that
come from poor backgrounds, that would be the central
prediction of this paper, would be on average of higher type simply because
they've gone through this more rigorous
selection process and have exceeded these
continuous thresholds. Think of an individual who's born in a poor neighborhood
in the state of Mississippi, it's very difficult
to get access to high-quality
high-school education, it's more difficult for
them to get into college. It's more difficult
for them to get a high-quality job conditional
attending college. If they're able to exceed
all these thresholds, they're more likely
to be of higher type. That's the story. How do we exactly
test this hypothesis? This is the first paper in
finance that will provide individual data
on census records that will trace the wealth, income, and professional
manager's parents. We're going to be looking at the wealth that the managers
in doubt at their birth. We'll be going to their
individual census record where the manager is
just a little kid. Those will be the main
variables that will determine wealth and professional
networks and so on, that managers are in doubt with, and then we will relate
this to outcomes of managerial performance in
the mutual fund industry. We believe this is a very
convenient empirical setting in which to test
this hypothesis. First, there are clearly high entry barriers
into this profession. It's a highly
selective profession. Second, there's
one-to-one correspondence between the managers
decisions and mutual fund outcomes,
hence the focus on solo managed mutual funds. We also know how to measure
mutual fund performance. There's a fairly clean
investment opportunity set faced by managers managing
similar types of funds. This is the empirical
setting. What do we find? I'll point out three
types of findings, the one first on performance, then the career path, and then some of mechanisms. First, on our main fun is that managers
that are born poor, significantly outperformed
managers that are born rich. The performance
differential between the extreme quintiles is approximately two
percent per year at a risk-adjusted basis when
measured by 4-factor Alphas. This performance differential
is very similar if we look at net or gross Alphas, if we look at benchmark
adjusted returns or abnormal returns
over the benchmark, or if we use the
[inaudible] measure of value extracted
from capital markets. What is the driver of that
performance differential? Is it the outperformance of the poor or are the
underperformance of the rich? Our findings are
most consistent with the underperformance of
the richest managers that are born to ultra
wealthy families. Then we try to think about what other reasons might there be for those managers to stay in the profession
of the underperform. We check whether
they help attract greater fund flows
for the fund-family, and we don't find explicit
evidence of that. However, of course, there
might be other agency motives that the fund family or the benefits of the fund
family might creep. Think of IPOs or maybe access to some
good lawyers and so on, that may provide the
benefits to the fund company that these managers are
retained even though again, these benefits do not ultimately accrue to the investors who have to bear lower
performance consequences. We look at the career paths and we find evidence consistent with this selection
hypothesis that outline. First of all, all else equal, managers who are born rich are significantly more
likely to be promoted. Second, managers
that are born poor, they are promoted only
if they outperformed. In other words, their
promotion decisions are significantly more
performance sensitive, whereas the ones that
are born rich are maybe promoted for other reasons without necessarily
being skilled. This is consistent with the
idea that among the poor, only the high types advance. Finally, we'll look at some
of the mechanisms of where this value creation
may stand from. We find some evidence that managers that are born
poor are more active. To some extent,
they work harder. There's greater turnover,
there's somewhat greater active share and
deviation from the indices. But the main channels
seems to be that a bit traits are more value-added
compared to the rich. Overall, in the punchline of the paper is that incidence
with high entry barriers, family descendant can serve as a valuable signal of
managerial quality. We believe this is the
first paper that links managerial family descent and their ability to add
value for fund managers. How exactly do we
establish these findings? We start off with the
Morningstar database of mutual fund managers, which includes life funds, deceased funds, the
funds were liquidated, so if a fund was in existence and it is in that database. Then we use the
standard data sources. The only non-standard
data source is that we tried to be
very careful when we account for education
because it's important factor that is
correlated with wealth and we actually email
universities to get very precise data
on fund managers, education, date of
graduation, major, and so on. They're obligated to
disclose this information if we want to confirm
fund managers degree. This is the main
value-added from the paper is really the information on the
family background. Our primary database is the LexisNexis public
records database. This is the most comprehensive
public records database that is used typically
for legal purposes. Individuals are traced through their social security numbers
throughout the database. The database covers
approximately half of billion of US population, both life and deceased. What do you need to be
included in the database? You only need to have a
social security number. You can be a foreign citizen, you can be a recent immigrant, you can move in and out. You don't need to own a house. All you need is social
security number and how these people are traced. We supplement this
with birth, marriage, and death records to identify
the managers household. When we met your manager
to the national census, we want to be very precise that the manager
that we identify, is indeed the fund manager
that we're interested in. We first establish their
parents and siblings, and then we go into the census. We identify not
just that manager, but the household with
the parents and siblings, so that we can be
reliably confident that we identified the correct data. Let me just illustrate
how exactly we identify the
manager's family tree and parents and siblings. First, we start with state birth records that are maintained by the Department
of Health of each state. If you have managers' full
name and date of birth, you can pull up
their birth record. Here's an example of Ohio. You have a manager,
Geoffrey Atkinson Brod. You get his mother's
maiden name, his mother's birthplace,
father's name, and so on. So much for using
mother's maiden name as your password for
online services. Same for Texas. You have a manager, you got their parents and so on. Then we know what
also to look at. Another example, if we run short of finding
a manager that way, we can pull up the
assessment record or the tax record for the house
that the manager owns. In almost all the cases, the house is co-owned
with the wife. We can identify the wife of the manager from the
ownership of the house. If they've owned any house in their life or they
were married at some point in their life, and then once we
identify the spouse, we pull up their
marriage certificate. The marriage certificate
gives us their parents. Again, we've locked into
manager's household, we can go to the 1940 census and pull up their birth record. Lastly, death records
and obituaries. Here's an example of how we deal with managers that
have common names. Here's a relatively
common named Kirk. David G. Kirk is a fund
manager in our sample. He's married to Ann B. Kirk
and they live in Sudbury, Massachusetts, which is just
half an hour West of here. Once we know the
name of the wife, we searched the obituaries. Even local very obscure
newspapers that just give that list the manager and
the wife as the survivors. Here's an example
of an obituary. This an obituary for
manager's brother. He's survived by his
brothers and sisters, David G. Kirk and his wife and of Sudbury, Massachusetts. Now that we know the name of the wife and it matches
the place where they live, we know we've locked in the right record so
we can get again the names of the parents
and the names of the siblings and identify
the correct records. That is the process. Now, what are the outcomes? Let me first show you what
our data looks like and what is the typical census
records looks like. I'm not going to
ask you to read it. Our records come in the form of images or photo images of actual handwritten
census records. I'm going to highlight a census record of one of the fund managers in the sample. I'll zoom in on that
record and show you what is in that record. But for now, I'd like to
just point out that one of the first finding is
that managers come from very highly segregated
neighborhoods, many of them come from
ultra rich neighborhoods and surrounded by very
wide shoe profession. Here's an example
of professions. Counselor for investments, treasurer of Paramount Pictures, stockbroker, president
electric appliances companies. So they come from very
special neighborhoods, and in a general, money managers
come from money. Here's a snapshot of the census record
where we zoom in on a particular fund manager. So the fund manager that
we're interested in here is Reginald Foster, who's just a little
kid at the time of the census and we
focused on his father, Reginald Foster Sr. He's a stockbroker. He makes over $5,000 a year, which is in the 99th
percentile in the 1940, when the manager is a kid. He's got two servants. We get the data on
their servants' income, education history, and it turns out that
having grown up with servants tends to be a
strong negative predictor of your performance
when you grow up. Here's another way to
describe the data. Here's the distribution
of incomes of manager's parents relative to the incomes of the general population. The blue bars represent
the general US population, and the red bars represent the the families
of fund managers. So the first thing I'd
like to point out is that managers come from
rich families. The average income of manager's parents is at
the 89th percentile, roughly the top 10 percent
of the US population. Secondly, there's huge
amount of dispersion, right? So when I show you
quintile regressions, the manager's that are in the bottom
quintile relative to other fund managers
are also sort of at the bottom of the
population at large. The managers that are rich, or certainly the ultra rich
relative to the population. So high mean and a very wide dispersion
where they come from, which gives us a lot of
identification power. They also come from
more educated families with about three more
years of college degrees. So the main finding
of the papers that those that come from ultra rich families in
the absolute right tail and wealth tend to be
weaker performers. Now, let's provide a little
bit more formal evidence in regression design
that also counts for meaning other correlates, such as parent's education, such as managers own education and other
correlates of wealth. First, I'm going
to start off with just linear regressions where we use different
measures of wealth. We can use their income, we can use the rent
value of the house. We can use the wealth
index, the wealth rank, which is just the value of
the house in which they live. They are negatively related to managerial performance and we control for other marriage or characteristics such as age, quality of their education, for parents characteristics,
their management job, number of years of education, and lots of fund
characteristics as well. In quintiles, you get a sense
of the economic magnitude. I think it's a nice way to summarize the
economic magnitudes. You only include fund
manager controls. The performance
differential between the top and bottom quintile of manager's wealth is approximately a 150
basis points a year. As you start adding
additional controls, the magnitudes
typically increase, and statistical significance
increases as well. So why is that? Well, the reason is it does
help to go to Harvard. It does help to have manager's parents who are in
the finance industry, who are well connected. Because we know from
the literature that social connections help
increase performance. We know from literature
that SAT scores, their education
quality are helpful. If you keep adding controls, you could raise that
performance differential to about two percentage
points per year. But really, picking
the rich and the poor, I think that this is a
more realistic estimate of 1.5 or 1.6 percent per year. The main driver, if you look at the performance across
different quintiles, is really the under performance of the ultra rich,
of the richest. This result is not specific to how we
measure performance. Here, I've put on the table for other ways
that you could measure performance in the
mutual fund literature using both met and gross Alphas using
benchmark adjusted returns, abnormal returns
over benchmark or the value extracted
from capital markets. The results are pretty robust to different ways you
could measure performance. You want me to put the
results in dollar terms as opposed to a percentage terms. One way to summarize them would be that an interquartile range, if an increase in managers
wealth corresponds to a monthly loss of approximately Three million dollars expressed in 2012 dollars as
measured by the, then this [inaudible] measure of value extracted
from capital markets. So far, I have given
you the results about the means of managerial
performance. Our selection
hypothesis also has important predictions for
the variance in performance. If it is really true that
managers that come from poor backgrounds face
significantly higher thresholds for entry into their profession, their performance is
going to be significantly less disperse so that only the high types
are able to enter and that the variance in
their performance in the cross-section is going to be
significantly tighter. If on the other hand, you come, you're born rich, you can enter the profession if you're
really, really good. If you're okay or if you're just mediocre through other channels. Our prediction of the
selection hypothesis again is that the dispersion in managerial performance
is going to be greater because different
types can enter. Formal way to test this is
the Golfheld-Quandt test for directional
heteroscedasticity. We find evidence consistent with those predictions
that I just outlined. So first, we find that
Alpha dispersion is significantly high that among managers that come
from richer families, consistent with the fact that managers may enter into
the profession having a lower bar and some
of the ones that enter could be good
and bad and mediocre. That as you start
splitting the sample into, between the rich and poor into more and more and more
selective categories. Instead of just looking at below the mean and
above the mean. If you look, let's say
at the top quartile and the bottom quartile, that difference
becomes even starker and even more
economically significant. The ratio of residual
variances is even higher if the comparison groups focus on the tails
of the distribution. So the further you
go in the tails, the greater this
difference in dispersion, again, consistent with
the selection hypothesis. Then we provide evidence also from their career trajectories. We study the career of
these cohorts of managers and see how they get promoted and what happens to them,
conditional and performance. So our main finding here is
that promotions of managers that from poor families are significantly more
performance sensitive, whereas managers that come from richer families,
first of all, may get promoted without necessarily being skilled
and second may be promoted for other
reasons that are not directly linked
to performance. Lastly, we look
at the ability of managers to attract
mutual fund flows. Because ultimately, the mutual fund industry
is structured in such a way that fees are based on assets
under management. Ultimately, mutual fund
companies might be more interested in not
necessarily the returns, but just the assets
under management. The hypothesis we test here is whether or not there's
any difference in the ability of the
managers to track flows and we do not
find any effect. We find that we've
looked pretty hard to identify the effects with different variations of
controls and fixed effect. Find no evidence that
managers are born rich are better at
attracting flows in a particular setting of
the mutual fund industry. This may be quite different in the private wealth management
industry, let's say, or in private equity
where there is a tighter contact between the manager and the client
and when the instead, in the mutual fund industry. the survey evidence tells us the vast majority of
investors do not even know the name of their fund
manager in the database. So we find that the flows
are driven primarily by fund and fund family
characteristics and that fund manager
characteristics have very little effect on flows. So these are the main
findings in the paper. I'd like to conclude
by providing you an industry perspective of anecdotal evidence that some of the managers appear
to be aware of these different entry barriers into the profession for
the rich and the poor. So here's a quote from a Wall Street Journal reporter that speaks to this effect. "Since the days when
the Goldmans and Morgans cared mostly bought hiring young men from the best families and
schools, the Bear or Bear Stearns cared about one thing only, and
that is making money. Its longtime chairman Ace Greenberg even
coined a name for his motley hires, PSDs for poor, smart, and a deep
desire to get rich." The same quote from
the chairman himself, "I think it is important
that we continue a policy that has
helped us prosper. We're really looking for people with PSD degrees." Again, for poor, smart, and a
deep desire to get rich. So let me stop here and
conclude in this paper, we argue that incidence
with high entry barriers, family descent can be an invaluable signal
of managerial quality. We provide evidence that
this is consistent with a selection mechanism where the inherited
status changes, the stringency of
selection, changes the entry barriers
into the profession. So if I were to zoom out and put this paper in the perspective
of the broader literature, leads the first evidence on the family backgrounds on
investment professionals and one of the first links
between family status and the manager's ability to create value. Thank you for your time. 