Claudia Goldin: My talk
is going to take us on a journey across a
century of women. It's 100 plus-year
odyssey of generations of college graduate women
from a time when they were able to have either a
family or a career rarely both to now when they anticipate having both
a family and a career. More women than
ever before are in striking distance
of these goals. The fraction of women who have graduated from
college or who will, for the most recent group of women by year of birth
here is about 45 percent. Of those who have graduated college and increasing fraction have gone for the
very highest degrees after their college graduation. You can see that the
fraction for men has remained constant for
almost a half-century, whereas that for women
has increased enormously. Finally, in terms
of these goals, a family and career is
the goal of family. Part of the changes that has only recently been
discussed is that college graduate women in the most recent
birth groups have increased their number
of their fraction of having children now so
that only 20 percent of those who've reached 45 years
old have not had a birth. That number is the same as it was at the very end
of the baby boom. I've recently finished most of a book on this
century-long journey, but my book like the Old Testament was
written in a BCE world. But here, that's
before the corona era. Many inequities
have been exposed by the COVID-19 economy and society most notably
those concerning social justice and the
criminal justice system. The COVID economy
has also magnified gender differences
at work and at home. Women are essential workers, but they are essential in
two places at the same time. The increased burden from school closings that may
continue to next year could erase years of gains by young women in a way that
we have rarely seen. This is where my talk
is going to end. It's going to take us there. But we must first take the
journey to that moment. [inaudible] to begin the
journey to the present, under 20 years ago, when college graduate women face a very stark choice between having family or having career. Some of them had a
job, not a career. The journey is going to wind up where more women than men, as we just saw, are
graduating from college, and there is great similarity
in their ambitions. They should make for
a very happy ending, but that doesn't seem
to be happening. A few clarifications. First, I'm going to focus on college graduate
women because they have the greatest opportunities
to achieve a career. Second, is that a career
is different from a job. Career is achieved as the
etymology of the word with leaders to think over
time by running a race. Whereas a job is
a spot position. You can earn a lot one year
but unless you ran that race, you're not going
to have a career. Aspirations and achievements
of college women across this century
greatly changed with increased income and the mechanization of the household and greatly
improved fertility control. But the way work is structured and the
persistence of social norms, no matter how much weaker they are today than they once were, means less success for
college graduate women. What had been the aspirations
and the achievements of women across the past
100 and so years? Five distinct groups
can be discerned. The first group, graduated college at the
beginning of the 20th century. They achieved career or family. The second group was a transition generation between one that had very few children, that's Group 1, and one that had
many, that's Group 3. This transition
generation Group 2 achieved a job and
then a family. The third group was the
subject of Betty Friedan, famous Feminine Mystique, and they graduated college
from around 1946-1965. They achieved a family and
then a job, rarely a career. The fourth is my generation
graduating college from the heady 1960s to
the end of the 1870s. It's a group that attempted
career and then a family. The final, the fifth group, the most recent group, is desiring career and family. College graduate women first aspired to attain
family or career, and few in this group managed
both at the same time. In fact, they were split into two groups: fully 50 percent of college graduate women
in this group never had a birth or adopted a child, 32 percent never married
throughout their lives, and just a small fraction
worked if they were married. Almost all of those who
weren't married did work. In Group 2, more college women
aspired to have careers, but the Great Depression intervened in this
transitional cohort, got a job and then
a family instead. As job opportunities
improved and as America was swept up in early
marriages and a baby boom, college women
shifted to planning for a family first and foremost, and then a job. As you can see,
just nine percent of this group never married, and 18 percent of the
total never had a birth. Their labor force
participation rates, not surprisingly, were low
when this group was young, nurturing their young children
but a greatly increased to almost three-quarters
when the kids were older and out of the house. Career and then family became the goal for many in Group 4. This group greatly
delayed marriage, although in the end, they had high marriage rates. They greatly delayed having
children for career, and they had high labor
force participation rates when they were young. But many of them
fully 27 percent, never had children as this Roy Lichtenstein print and a conic print for this
generation reminds us. For Group 5, the goal is not
one or the other, not one first and
then the other, but to have both together, to have career and family. Just 21 percent
as we saw before, do not have children by the
time they're in their 40s. The 100 year transition from career or a family to career and family is book ended here with women who have
served in Congress, beginning with the
amazing Jeannette Rankin, the first woman elected
to federal office. She was typical of the career portion
of her birth cohort. She never married,
she had no kids, and she had a career and she
had a pretty amazing career, not just in Congress, but as an individual who worked tirelessly for suffrage,
and by the way, was the only woman who was able to vote in Congress
for that amendment. Tammy Duckworth is
on the other side of this hundred-year history. She's the first senator to
have a baby while in office, and she's the first
to bring a baby into an active
session of Congress. Although many would
say that there had been babies and Congress
before that time. Betty Friedan is in the middle, looking
rather coquettish. You may be thinking
that because of the enormously large increase
in college graduation, that most of these differences
that I've been telling you about across these
groups concern selection of women into a bet
graduating from college. The surprising finding is that selection is
not that important. I have tracked college
entrance classes of women from the 1890s. All the way to around
the 1980s or so. These women have similar
levels of ability. They have similar levels
of parental resources. Their marriage ages, and
their birth fractions. Track those of the total group. I've been showing
you very closely. Treatment and not selection
clearly dominates. College for Group 1 had
a treatment effect by enabling the women in this group to be
financially independent. They didn't have to marry. As women's earnings
abilities rose and as substitutes for household
goods became cheaper. Husbands preferences,
rather than changing just became
a lot more expensive. Though family was still placed
ahead of job or career. For Group 3, that's the group of Betty Friedan in the
Feminine Mystique. College women planned
their confinement and they planned their escape. They trained to be teachers, nurses, social
workers, librarians. After the children were grown. For Group 4 the pill and its dissemination
to unmarried women enabled the delay of marriage. They enabled to delay a family, and they help boost women's investments in
education and their career. But the biological clock ran out on men for
many of these women, as the Lichtenstein
print reminds us, marriage and family for Group 5 are still
being greatly delayed. In fact, they're
being delayed more for Group 5 than for Group 4. But birth rates have actually, as we just saw then up in part due to assisted
reproductive technologies. The transition over this period, it's a long period. It was not swift and it
wasn't due mainly to descent. Instead, it was often due to various
technological advances, increased earnings, and
increased education. Now, an important accompaniment
to the transition across these groups concerns changes
in customs and norms. For the past 50 years, the General Social
Survey, the GSS, has asked respondents a
question whether individuals agreed with the statement
that preschool children are likely to suffer if
their mother works. I'm not quite certain
what they mean by suffer, but that's the way the
question was asked. Here I have graph their answers
by the respondents birth, year, and as you can
see, agreement decrease. The vertical axis here is the fraction agreeing
with that statement. You can see in the
early birth years, for these respondents,
about 70-80 percent agreed. More recently, about
20-30 percent agreed. Without any new evidence whether children
suffered or not. Norms began to
change because they became more expensive
to sustain. Now, what about actually
measuring how much success at career and family women in these groups actually achieved? To do this, and I've thought it was
important enough to do. To do this. I first
needed some definitions. I need a definition
of family and I needed a definition of career. Family here is defined as
having at least one child, a biological child,
or an adopted child. It does not require a husband to be included as
having a family, and unfortunately, it
doesn't include dogs. You have to have a real
child biological or adopted. That's family. That's the easy part. Career is the harder part. Career is achieved by
exceeding a level of income for three years
in the five-year period, and as you can see here, I have two age groups. I do it for more age groups, but here I'm only showing two each has a five-year period, and to have a career, you have to exceed a level of income for three of
each of the five years. Note as well that I have
three of the groups here. Group 3, group 4, part of Group 5, because part of it
isn't old enough yet. But I don't have data
for groups 1 and 2. Now, the question is, what is that level of income? The level of income is
given by the income of same age and education. Man. It'd be a
college graduate man here in each of
these age groups, and it is exceeding want that individual would earn
if that individual was at just the 25th percentile of the male
distribution of income, and I use several
longitudinal datasets here. Interestingly, success. I'm measuring here
success for women. The vertical axis is the
fraction of the group achieving career and family at
that age that's given. Success and career and family
for women increase both across and within
these birth cohorts. Success for the latest group, this Group 5, is around 30 percent for the
older women in their '50s, and that is about
half of what it is for a comparable man. But it's just 22 percent. For the younger women are only 40 percent what it is
relative to a comparable men. There has been great
change over time, but the fraction achieving career and family
is still not that high and it's not
that high relative to the husbands of these women. Even though he's succession of women advanced on this journey, group after group,
women's careers often still take a backseat
to those of their husbands. As, as we see, the
most recent group has not fared all that well, and they've expressed
their disappointment and frustrations by focusing on a host of issues such as
bias in the workplace, pay inequity, salary
transparency, or its lack of and sexual
harassment in the workplace. We can see this in the counts of phrases used in the
New York Times, and these phrases are both gender discrimination as a
phrase and sex discrimination. Early on in this period, it would have been
sex discrimination later on in the period. The New York Times
would have used the term gender discrimination, and so what we can
see is that there are two ways of what appear to be frustration
in the workplace. The first wave
occurred in the 1970s. Almost suddenly it increases, and then it declines, and then it increases
again in the 2010s. For the earlier period, it's reflecting the noisy
revolution of 50 years ago, and for more recently, it's reflecting the
Me Too movement. But is each group progressed and pass the baton from Group 1, 2, 3, 4-5. As actual barriers, a ton of different barriers fell and
as social norms changed, the real underlying problem
has actually been revealed. There is no question that there has been classic discrimination. There's no question
that there are lots of bad actors out there. There's no question
that there a bias workers and bias supervisors. There's no question that
there's been sexual harassment. But most of the difference between men and
women in terms of their careers and in terms of their pay is due
to something else. The new problem with
no name to paraphrase, Betty Friedan is the notion
of greedy work that there are a large nonlinearities
and convexities and pay to have a family takes the time of at
least one parent. There is no way to
contract out everything. By enlarge, why have kids if you're going to
contract down everything? The gender gap in earnings
is an indication. It's a symptom of
career blockage. Let's look at the
gender gap in earnings. Women earn less than
men on average. This is the long time series that we've all gotten used to. This is the one
that we see every now and then and read about. It is female to male median annual
earnings ratio for a full-time
year round workers. What we don't often see is that we can do
this by education. If we, instead of
looking at all workers, look just at college graduates, we would see that college
graduate women have been earning even less relative
to college graduate men, particularly since the 1980s. Now, a bunch of clues
to what's going on in terms of the aggregate and in terms of what's happened, happening since the
1980s, is the following. Gender gaps in earnings exist for both annual earnings
and hourly earnings. Women earn less than men, not just because they
work fewer hours. In fact, they earn less
on an hourly basis. Another point to consider in
thinking about why there is a gender gap is that women with children earn less than
women without children. In fact, women without children
after they have children, generally take a hit relative to the father of that child. Three, earnings gaps
increase with age of the woman to some point
and they increase, as I just noted, with many joyous events such
as births and marriage. Fourth is that the
gaps are greater at the upper end of the male earnings and
education distribution. Fifth is that
earnings inequality matters a lot for
the gender gap. The more unequal earnings are in an occupation the lower are women's earnings
relative to men's. One of the reasons
that we see this widening in the 1980s is that when there has been increasing inequality in the United States. Finally, gender
gaps and earnings are greater for
occupations that have more demands on employee time and where a client
relationships matter the most. There is another side, a flip side to
gender inequality. That flip side is
coupled inequity. Working mothers are
on-call at home and working fathers are
on-call at work. The reasons for both
gender inequality and coupled inequity
are the same. The issues are really the flip
side of this same problem. Many jobs, especially the
higher earnings ones, pay far more on an hourly
basis when the work is yes. On-call, rush, evening, weekend, and by large unpredictable. These time commitments interfere with family
responsibilities. The problem is illustrated here. One job is flexible,
the red line. It has a linear wage
with respect to hours. This horizontal axis that I call hours may not be
number of hours. It may be which hours, it may be weaken hours, evening hours,
unpredictable hours. The other job is
not so flexible. That's the blue line. It has a wage that
rises with hours. The couple with children can
both work at the blue dot. If they both worked
at the blue dot, their children would perish. But they could both
work at the red dot. But if they worked
at the red dot, they would be leaving a
lot of money on the table. They'd be leaving the
area in brackets. One works at the flexible,
less remunerative job, the red job, and the other
works at the less flexible. One works at the more flexible but less
remunerative job, the other works at
the less flexible but more remunerative job at the blue dot. For many highly educated
couples with children. As I said, she's the professional who's
also on call at home. He's the professional who's
also on call at the office. In consequence, he earns more than she does
and that gives rise to a gender gap
in earnings and it also produces couple inequity. If the flexible job
one more productive. The difference would
be a lot less and family equity would be cheaper. Couples would be
able to purchase this cheaper family equity and you'd reduce the gender gap. Know that even if these
were same-sex couples, there could still
be couple inequity, but without gender inequality. Even if couples really
wanted a 50/50 relationship, high earnings for the position that had less controllable, less predictable hours
would entice them to engage in what we might think of as a newfangled version of
the old division of labor. What are the solutions? First off, any solution must involve lowering the
cost of this amenity, which we can call
temporal flexibility. This simplest would be to
create really good substitutes, clients then could be handed off with no loss of information. IT could be used to pass information with a little
loss and fidelity. Teams of substitutes, not
teams of complements, could be created as they
have been in fields, high-income fields such as
pediatrics, anesthesiology, veterinary medicine,
personal banking, many tech jobs, and
primary care physicians. The cheaper the amenity, the more linear pay
becomes by hours worked. But the tale that
I've been telling you was set in a BCE world. What does it tell us
about the new era? An era that I will call DC, that's during corona
and an era just around the corner that
I'm going to call AC-DC, which has a combination
of after and during. Note here, this is from a recent piece in the New
York Times by Deb Perelman, who is best known
for her articles on cooking and Deb Perelman
remarks in the subheading. Essentially she's saying,
can we have both. She said, in this economy, you can have one or the other. You can't have both. That's shades of going way back to the early 20th
Century to Group 1. In mid-March, suddenly
and swiftly and unpredictably we descended
into a DC world. Most workers sheltered in place. They worked from home. Fortunate children had online
schooling and at-home help. But what happened
to childcare hours? What do we see is
going to happen to childcare hours and
the work of parents? The vertical axis gives us weekly hours for couples. I'm looking here only at
college graduate women, married to college graduate men, both of whom are employed, and they have at
least one child. The horizontal axis
gives us family type. It is the age of
the youngest child. Focus first on the blue bars. The blue bars are
from data that we have in The American Time
Use Survey, the ATUS. I'm using here this
survey from 2010, after the Great
Recession to 2018. In the BCE world, college graduate
employed mothers, remember all of
these are employed mothers with college graduate
employed husbands in school and at least one
child were doing around 60 percent of
total childcare hours. I'm not including here household activities
like food preparation. The fraction done by women is given by the number
above the bars. You can see that for
the school-age kids, six less than 13, it's about 58 percent
for the little kids. It's about 66 percent, is the fraction of the total
being done by the mothers. For working couples,
the DC world, the red bars involved almost
double the childcare hours. These red bars are
derived from a number of surveys that people have
done this past April. The data that they collect isn't fully comparable to what's
in the ATUS but I've, for the time being, hammered it in place, the 2020 ATUS is not going
to come out for some time. But in addition to the fact
that we had 90 percent of these kids out of
school and everyone was at home and there was
a lot more childcare. There was also for women, a lot more parental sharing. The fraction that women
did, you can see, actually fell even though the total numbers
almost doubled. For those six less than 13, they're doing 52
percent of the total. I also want to mention that these are really
special people. These are college-educated,
they are well-to-do. They have a fair
amount of resources. These aren't single moms, so these are couples. If I look at what the mothers
themselves are doing, note the change in the
vertical axis here in that this is now
only for the women. Women, as I said, did a lot more that men added considerably in the DC
world to their plates. Now, we are moving into
what I call an AC/DC world. The AC/DC is that we're going
to have part-time school in some districts perhaps no school except for online
school in other districts. Very few districts are
going to have all kids going five days a week for
the full length of time. Also, childcare is another
area that has increased, but probably not as much
as it was previously. But at the same time, this is happening to
childcare and education. Full-time work, and many offices and
workplaces has began. What can we expect? For women, the AC/DC world is given by these
light red bars, will be the BCE
world on steroids. The reason I will
give you in a second, but here I'm really
going a little further out on a data limb. I have to make a fair
number of assumptions. The scenario that I have here
is that when schools are open half-time in
the AC/DC world, total childcare hours
are going to be halfway between what
I know they were from the ATUS to what I
construct they are in the April, the during corona period. But because of non-linearities in work that I was
just talking about, one member of the couple is going to go back
to work full time. Because even my college
graduate couples have rent to pay and
mortgages to pay. The other member of the couple
is going to work probably part-time from home
and take care of the kids the other
part of the time. If history is any guide, it's the men who are going to go back to work full-time and revert to their BCE
childcare levels. Fathers' hours in
the three regimes are going to look like this. That is, the light red bar is going to be
identical to what it was in the BCE world given to me by the American
Time Use Survey. What's going to happen is
that women are going to take up the slack and do a
greater share of the total. The bottom line is that
there are going to be no net gains from women
in the AC/DC world. They're going to be doing the same number of
hours of childcare. They're going to be doing
a greater fraction. Look again at the six less
than 13 year old group. They had been doing
about 60 percent. When everyone was at home, they did 52 percent and they did a lot more in terms
of total hours. But in the AC/DC world, they're going to do the
same number of hours, but they're doing a much
greater fraction of that because what they gain from the fact that school
is open half-time, they lose from the fact that the fathers of these children
are at work full-time. Because of convex hourly pay, couple equity is expensive
for the family unit. That's going to continue and women's careers by enlarge
will probably be set back. Recall that the corrective in the BCE world was
change the workplace, drive down the price
of flexibility. The corrective in the
AC/DC world must add, change the care place, drive down the
cost of childcare. In conclusion,
when schools first began in the United
States centuries ago, and when they expanded during the high school movement
in the early 20th century, a coordinated equilibrium was provided by good government. Good government could
do the same today. We need to find safe
ways to have classes for children for their future
and for their parents today. As in the Great Depression, we have unemployed
labor We have in fact, highly educated
unemployed labor today in the form of recent college
graduates who don't have jobs. They could be harnessed in a new works progress
manner as in the new deal and set to work
helping to educate children, freeing parents, that is
mainly women to work. In the BCE world when the cost
of flexibility is lowered, we will have solved the
problem and achieve both gender equality
and couple equity. In the AC/DC world, we have to reduce the cost to parents of educating children. The original journey was
from career or family to career and family and by and large the journey
continues. Thank you. 