Lawrence Christiano:
We're going to get further away now from the actual nitty-gritty
hard stuff. It's going to have to be
well be more distant. Actually, I had hoped to
have Dynare code on this, as I said, but I don't. This is going to be
relatively more onto the, no we've been doing
economics already. I don't know what I'm
talking about. Here it is. Let's start out with
what the story is. If we look at standard
of being what standard now is
rapidly changing. But if you look at what was
standard in 2007 models, the borrowers and lenders were all the same people
in those models. The household, for example, was the one who suppressed their consumption in order to do the investment. And they did the investment, they built the capital
themselves and they did the suppression of the
consumption themselves. That's how things work. Now the problem is in reality
it doesn't work that way. In reality the people who do the suppressing
of consumptions, they are generally
old people with no real creative ideas anymore, but income, and the people who had the idea for
building investment are typically young people
who have no money. They're very different
people and they're not the people that hang
out in bars together. They're not exactly
the same types. As a consequence,
there's trouble, and the reason
there's trouble is, this is borrowing and lending is essentially a zero-sum game. If you're the borrower, after you build whatever it is that you're going to
build with my money, then we have to take
that pie and we have to cut it somehow. What I get, you don't
get and what you get, I don't get, it's a very
much zero-sum game. There's a conflict
there and between us. The conflict can be
there for all reasons. There could be a moral
hazard problem that you have an incentive to relax and go to the beach and
relax or something, or you have an ability
to steal stuff. There's all kinds
of possibilities, and what financial
friction models are all about is putting their fingers on what
is exactly the problem, and then what the models do is they generally
come up with some framework and
institution or a contract or something that allows people to deal with this
problem that they have. We have many financial
friction models and there are of many
different types. What I'm going to
describe to you here is what I think is the most successful
model so far in macro, which is a model of asymmetric information and
costly state verification. It is not the only model around. At the moment, I think
it's the best model and I hope that in the future it's not
the best model anymore because that means
that we won't have been thinking very hard. This is going to be, I think the center of
attention in modeling in the next 10-20 years and so we should see a lot of
action with this thing. The model that I'm
going to talk about was actually invented in 1978, by Rob Townsend and also further developed by Gale
Helwig in the early '80s, so we're not talking about
anything brand-new here. The people who really pushed
this model and brought it into attention is a
classic paper by Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist
who in a handbook chapter 1999 showed how to move it
into a DSD type framework. Townsend was a very micro
type of theory thing, whereas BGG, as we'll call them, they show how to bring it. Although the stuff
that I'm going to be talking about is more of
the stuff that I did, which was to take
with my co-authors, which is to take the model and put various different
types of shocks in it and I'm going to show you how after
you go to the data, you come away with a
very different view. It might be an incorrect view, but you come away with
a very different view about what's moving
the variables around. In particular, you'll come
away with a view that is driven by a fundamentally
financial shock, a risk shock, and this is
data over the last 20 years. I'm not talking about
the last since 2008. In fact, this analysis was
stopped in 2008 quarter four, the data was stop there. And what we found was that
something called risk shocks, account for about 50 percent
of fluctuations in US GDP, which strikes me as
ridiculously high. But in any event, it seems
like an important shock. And what I'm going to
do is I'm going to tell you the story of that. I'm going to tell you the
whole story about how it is that you stick in these
financial frictions and then some uncertainty that's living that emerges
because of the nature of those financial frictions
is going to turn out to look like it can explain a
huge part of business cycles. The way I want to proceed is I'm going
to go in two steps. I think the best way
to do this is to do microeconomics first and
then macroeconomics. What I mean by that
is I'm going to talk about the details of the borrowing and
lending environment without worrying about
the broader economy, I'm not going to worry
about capital accumulation, employment, our interest rate. I'm going to just worry about the microeconomics
of this contract, and then after that, I'm going to move it
into a DSGE model and I'm going to then explain to you what we found out
about the risk shock. This is the micro
economics of this thing. I'm going to imagine that there's a bunch of people out there
called entrepreneurs. What entrepreneurs do is, or what's special about them
is that they have access to a particular
production technology that normal people
don't have access to. These entrepreneurs have
their own resources, so they have an ability to invest in these projects
all by themselves. But since they're the only
people who are good at this, and because there are other
people around who have resources but don't know how to invest in these technologies. There is a reason why the
entrepreneur should borrow. If you're an entrepreneur, and I'm another person who doesn't have access
to the technology, I want to participate in you
know how to make an iPad. Really cool thing. I want to participate in that. I would like to give you money and you actually don't
mind borrowing the money. You'll see in a
second, you won't mind borrowing the money at all. We have a basis here
for some Lenny. The entrepreneurs have
their own assets, but it makes sense
and it will happen for them to borrow. Now, N is the level of their own
entrepreneurs' resources. By the way, at this moment,
we can think of that as coconuts or whatever
your favorite thing is. I don't know if there's no
money, maybe there is money. This is N units of
resources is all. When we get to the
general equilibrium model because you have to say
what exactly these things. But anyway, there's many,
many entrepreneurs, and they all have
different levels of resources, different N, there's a whole distribution
of entrepreneurs by N. What I'm going to be looking at is all the entrepreneurs with a particular level of N , you see what I
mean in a second. It's like two-dimensional
thing you can think about on the horizontal distance, you have different values of N, high N's over there,
lower N is over there, on the vertical distance,
you have entrepreneurs. The world is a two-dimensional
place where for every N, there's a whole distribution
of entrepreneurs. This level of N,
there's a distribution of entrepreneurs and so on. I'm going to look now at the situation of one
type of entrepreneur. This room here is going to be a special room where
entrepreneurs of type N come. We will have other rooms where entrepreneurs with a different
level of N go and borrow. We're talking here about
N equal to 10,000. You're the entrepreneurs that
are coming here to borrow. We are going to suppose a completely
competitive environment , everything is competition. If you're Canadian, you
won't like this because you have four banks in Canada. In the US, maybe it's not
so attractive either, but we have more banks, but in fact we only
have five big banks, and then we have a
zillion tiny banks. Anyway, we're going to suppose that the borrowing and
lending is done in completely competitive
markets so that there's actually a
continuum of you guys. I'm going to be the banker, but I'm a representative banker. There's me type people as
well. We're all competitors. Everybody is atomistic
in this world. What we're going to talk about is we're in the room
here for N type people, we're going to talk
about the kind of arrangements that we're
going to come up with. I haven't described
the environment to you and I haven't even described what the problem is other than that we have
a conflict of interests, but I haven't shown you that
the details of that yet. We'll talk about this,
and then of course, after we're done worrying about what kind of contract
comes out in this room, then we'll talk about
what happens in all the other rooms for
different levels of N. What is the project that the entrepreneur
has access to? They have a project
that has a rate of return equal to 1
plus RK times Omega, where Omega is a
random variable that you individually
draw independently, what everybody else is drawing. Everybody is 1 plus RK, and Omega is an
idiosyncratic shock that you individually draw. The mean of the
idiosyncratic shock across all of you is one. So the average return
that all of you guys are going to get is 1 plus RK, but individually, we don't know what
you're going to get. Some of you are going
to get high return, some of you get a small return. Actually, we're going to suppose a long normal distribution. There's going be
some people like Bill Gates here who draw
an incredibly high Omega, but then most people are
going to be involved in a normal type of thing
at the beginning. By the way, the shock that I'm going to have in
here that's driving the economy is the cross-sectional
dispersion of Omegas. Sometimes if there
was no dispersion, then you're all drawing
Omega equal to 1. There is no dispersion at all, you're all drawing
an Omega equal to 1, and you all look the same to me. If there is dispersion, then the average is one, but there's a huge
difference between what you each individually
are going to draw. Some people like to think of late 2008 as being
a time like that. Normally, when a bank
approaches people, they are worried, what kind of a person am I
dealing with here? But in 2008, the degree of
uncertainty went up because no one knew what happened as a consequence of the
housing market collapse, no one knew what happened
to the net worth of the individual borrower. Different people
became threatened to become more
different or there was more risk among people. In the model, there's
this Omega thing. Here's a picture from a helicopter of
what's going on here. On the one hand, we're going to have normal households who are going to be the
source of lending. They are going to give
their money to banks. The entrepreneurs are the
ones who have these ideas. They have their own resources, and they're going to want to get money out of these banks. Now, having described
the problem yet, here's the problem. Before I describe the problem, let me describe to you what
normally would happen in economic model is each of these guys are going to
have an uncertain return. The normal thing to do
would be give each one 100 bucks and then just give me a fraction of what you get. That's called a
sharing contract. You have a sharing contract. I'll give you $100 and then whatever you get
out of this thing, you keep a fraction
because you're a cool person and give me the rest and that's the
way you're going to do it. That contract is not
feasible in this environment because only the entrepreneur
actually sees omega. Only the entrepreneur sees what actually happened
inside this contract, the entrepreneurs
don't know what kind of omega they're going to draw. So the entrepreneurs
are all excited, they're going to build an iPad, or they're going to
build something, and they're hoping it's
going to be an iPad, but it could be something else. No one knows, but exposed to all kinds of stuff happens, and some entrepreneurs
draw a high Omega, some draw a low Omega, and the banker doesn't know. In particular, the entrepreneurs
have an incentive to under-report what they got. Relative to the
sharing contract, the entrepreneur would say, look, I'm sorry, it
didn't work out. Let's try again next time and
I'm sure it'll work then. The bank would off course
hear that from everyone. Now the bank knows that everyone says
that they're lying. But in any individual
person, they don't know. They can't tell that
any individual person is lying. You know what I mean? I remember when I was
a kid in high school, what we would do is
it was Mr. McCreary, who was the Maths teacher. Mr. McCreary was
very a sad person. I'll explain to you in
a moment that he was actually fully justified
in being so sad. Every time he turned around
to write some Math stuff, somebody would take
a straw that you drink your Coca-Cola with
and you get a paper thing, you wet it with your tongue, you make it into a
nice big thick thing, you stick it at the end
of the straw and go and then the thing would hit Mr. McCreary and he
would turn around. Everybody had the most
innocent look on their face. So he understood that someone had shot the
spitball at him, but any individual person
who you talk to, of course, he couldn't prove, they would all deny it, and off course there was
no way to prove, and it's the same way here. All of these peoples would
deny having any return, but the bank literally
cannot go in and tell them, can't go in. Because it's true that there's some chance that they
would get a low return. There's some
fraction that again, a low return, they don't
know which ones are with. Now will be assumed that the
bank can see what they did, but only at a cost. We can go through
bankruptcy proceedings. The bank could,
through great expense, see what the individual
person does, but that's not very efficient. If we add a sharing contract, the bank would have to
declare bankruptcy on everyone and would have
to investigate everyone. That's assumed to be a cost that's too great and
would be inefficient, it would make
intermediation impossible. We see that now. We see a lot of bankruptcies is going on now in the
United States and you see how expensive and costly
bankruptcies are in terms of the banks trying
to get assets. So the sharing contract will not be feasible in this environment because it's simply too costly, you would have to
go and monitor. The word monitor is used here. You have to go monitor every
individual entrepreneur and that will be too expensive. So what you get instead is what Rob Townsend called
the standard deck contract. He must have been astounded
when he discovered this, because the standard deck
contract is what it says. It's standard, it's
like a normal contract. A standard deck contract says, I'm going to lend you $100, and here's an interest rate,
10 percent or something. If you pay me that 10 percent, we're done, you can just leave, we're done, no problem. I know that some of you will not be able to pay that
10 percent because, this is a log-normal
distribution, some of you are going to draw
an Omega that's too low, you won't be able to pay back. So you just have
to raise your hand , because you don't
have the money, you're going to have to
say I can't pay you, and I will then go
and monitor you. Now, if we structure
this contract okay, then I will only be monitoring
a very small fraction of people and everyone else will just pay me the
interest and go away. I regret having a contract like that as a bank because
I know some of you are going to be Bill Gates, and my standard deck contract
is not going to share in your tremendous gains. On the other hand, that standard
deck contract does have the property that I'm not going to have to do a
lot of monitoring. In fact, when you calibrate
these types of models, you rig them so
that you get about the bankruptcy rates that
you observe in the data, and bankruptcy rates
are really quite low. This is the standard
debt contract. The entrepreneur is going
to receive a contract from a bank and the contract is going to give an
interest rate Z. This is a work of genius of the Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist. They decided to call this Z. Who would ever think of
calling an interest rate Z? I don't know, but
that's what they did. They did the Z, so everybody has to follow them
because of that. The contract has two numbers, a Z and it has a loan amount, and if the entrepreneur
can't pay it, then the bank has to pay monitoring costs
and they clean out, they take everything
from the entrepreneur. Here's some notation.
The net worth of the entrepreneur is
N, which is, by the way, a fixed number in this
room because we're fixing N. The amount of the
loan you get is B, and therefore the assets that you're going to acquire is A. The entrepreneur gets assets A. The entrepreneur has to get a sufficiently good Omega in order to be able to
pay the debt back. There's an Omega bar, which is going to
be the critical cut-off for all Omega is
bigger than omega bar. They can pay back the interests for omega
as the unlucky ones, we get an Omega less than
omega bar. They will not. There'll be this
critical cutoff, which actually plays a big
role in the analysis here. What I want to do now is
I want to move towards the development of an
equilibrium contract. Again, this is a
contract that's going to revolve between us and
we're totally competitive. To do that, I'm going
to have to figure out your preferences, and that's what I'm
about to do now. I'm going to make some
goofy assumptions about your preferences in the process. Then I'm going to
have to represent my situation as a banker
in the right way, and then we're going to combine
those things and you'll see the equilibrium contract. This is going to be the
utility of the entrepreneurs. I have in mind here
that the entrepreneurs, their utility is
the end-of-period resources that they have. This is the ex-ante, expected utility of
the entrepreneur. Ex-ante, they form an expectation based on the
log-normal distribution, ex-ante they think
they can get an omega going from 0 to plus infinity. They know that ex-ante, however, they will only gain
anything if omega is higher than omega bar that's why the integral starts
at omega bar, not below omega bar. Then what they get, if they get anything,
they get 1 plus r k times omega times a. That's the total
return that they get. These are their assets, and this is the return
on their assets. This is what they get,
this is what they pay. Omega bar is defined as the point where this
thing here is 0. Omega is less than this, it's negative or actually, they get cleaned out, so they
just get 0 at that point. Here, I divided this by what our state
variables in this system. So n is the net worth
of the entrepreneurs, but we're looking at a
room full of particular n so this is just
a number and R is the deposit rate at banks and that's totally
exogenous in this room here. This is something
that's determined in the broader economy. I'm just dividing by the scalars actually for convenience. Let's work out what these
entrepreneurs utility, so to speak looks like. What I did here was I took, this is the utility
function that we got from the previous
thing and then what we did was I'm subtracting something in
terms of the omega bar. Omega bar is defined as the value of omega that
makes this equal to that. That's what their
revenue is equal to. I can do this substitution and then because of
this substitution, there's a cancellation here. There we go. What is it? This thing is like sleeping.
I have to push it. It comes out and the new little thing that
comes up came out there. There's a little
thing called L there. L is leverage and leverage
is a divided by n, or it's equal to b plus N over N. You can write this in five million different ways. B over N plus 1, because I divided
that thing by N, and because you've got assets
there in the numerator, what pops out when you take
the ratio is leverage. It turns out to be
convenient to write this in terms of
leverage and no loss of generality because I'm
dividing by net worth and the net worth is just
a state variable from the point of view
of our discussion here. You can see also, maybe it's not so obvious, but the omega bar can
be written in that form because we have that z times b is equal to 1 plus R k times Omega bar times A. That's the definition. The definition of Omega
bar is the value of Omega that makes the revenues
equal to the cost. Any lower Omega and you're bankrupt any higher
Omega and you're fine. You're making positive profits. This Omega bar here is equal to Z over
1 plus R k times B over A and then B over A is B over B plus N
and that's equal to 1 over B plus N over B and that's equal to 1
over 1 plus N over B. Actually, I think I'm
going the wrong direction here. How do I want to do this? Shoot? What I want there
is I want B over A. B over A equals B over
N times N over A. Sorry, this might be a disaster. I think I'm participating
in a disaster. B over N divided by
L. Is that okay? Now, what about B over N? Is B over N equal to L minus 1. L minus 1 is equal
to A over N minus 1, which is equal to B
over N. Because A is equal to N plus B. N
plus B divided by N is. You see, see how simple it is. The problem is that that
formula is very important so you have to be persuaded
that it's correct. It's very important for
the following reason. If you look at the utility
of this entrepreneur, notice that L shows
up in two places. It shows up here, and it shows up here
because of the Omega bar. The thing to notice is that as L gets bigger and
bigger and bigger, their utility is
always getting bigger from the point of view of
that place where it shows up. Holding Omega bar fixed
as L gets bigger, this is constantly
getting bigger. On the other hand, as L gets bigger, Omega bar, you can see here
as L gets bigger, this is 1 minus 1 over
L. L gets bigger, this is this getting smaller. This Omega bar here
is getting bigger. As Omega bar gets bigger, this whole thing
here gets smaller. It's like L has
two effects here. One is that it makes
things bigger, the other thing it
make things smaller. Why does it make things smaller? Well, because L is related to borrowing
and is a fixed number, so the bigger is L,
the more they borrow. The problem with that
is by borrowing more, you have to have more
luck to break-even, that's a source of
negative utility, the more I borrow it's more
likely that I'm going to be bankrupt and so I
won't be getting anything out of this deal,
that's the bad thing. On the other hand, the more I borrow, the more I get in the beautiful state in
which I am not bankrupt. That's where the L
outside over there is, and these two effects, one is weak and one is strong. The one on the right
there is very strong, it has a constant power. But Omega bar, notice as
L gets larger and larger, Omega bar stops changing, that's 1 minus 1 over L as L gets large,
that's just one. As L gets large, it's just like I don't
have any net worth at all, and I still need a
certain amount of luck in order to break even, but after I have no net worth, that doesn't matter, but I'm still making money
when I'm Bill Gates. In particular in
this environment, utility is unbounded
above in L. If I ask you, the interest rate is 10 percent, how much would you
like to borrow? You would say infinity, please and that's independent
of the interest rate, if I tell you z is 10 billion, I said yesterday was 10 percent that we had
a good day yesterday, but today it's a million
percent you have to borrow, you would say, I'll take an
infinite amount there too. This utility function
is always increasing, basically because they're
bounded on the left side, on the low side, and they're unbounded
on the right side, they can always have a
crack at being Bill Gates, and in the event that they
do become Bill Gates, they would wish that
L was infinitely large because their profits are linearly increasing in that. Utility is unbounded
in borrowing. In particular, we can't do a standard Marshallian
cross demand and supply for loans here, we cannot come up with a
demand curve for you guys. Normally you have,
I guess demand is downward sloping and
supply is upward sloping, we can't do an
environment like that because if I give you
an interest rate, you can't give me a loan demand because you always have an
infinite amount of demand, so we cannot use the Marshallian cross concept of equilibrium in this
type of an environment, and by the way, this
is pretty standard. In financial friction
environments a Marshallian cross type
of thing like the market, the thing that worked so well
for the market for apples, for oranges and stuff like
that just don't work here, and you have to do
something else. We're going to deal
in something called the market for contracts. Anyway, this is what I've
just been saying here, and here's the problem
for any interest rate, they always have an
unbounded utility function. But of course, in equilibrium we can have unbounded borrowing, so it's just not a concept
that's going to work, the Marshallian cross stuff, and so what we're going
to be dealing with is in equilibrium contracts. We're going to have demand and supply for the whole
damn contract, not just for B, but
for a Z and a B, we're going to offer people contracts are going
to be traded in equilibrium, not whatever it is in these
Marshallian cross thing. Now there's a very
natural way of thinking about a contract in
this environment, but you have to twist your head just a tiny bit to do that. If you look at this
utility function here in the end it's best
expressed in terms of Omega bar and L rather
than the more natural Z and L. There's not a
big difference there. For any given L,
Omega maps directly. If I tell you what L is, our K is just a known number, if I tell you what L is and I tell you
what Omega bar is, you can back out what
the interest rate is. If I tell you how much luck it takes for you to break even, you know implicitly there's
an interest rate in there. We can equivalently characterize the contracts as involving Omega bar and L as opposed to involving
Z and L. Z and L, of course, the natural thing, and you probably already
irritated the whole concept of going into this peculiar
Omega bar L space, it turns out it's slightly more convenient to think about contracts in terms
of Omega bar and L, so that's what
we're going to do, we're going to imagine
the contract in terms of omega bar and L. I'm going to characterize
the preferences of the borrowers in terms of
their indifference curves. The indifference
Omega bar is roughly the interest rate that
is higher Omega bar bad. Higher or luck that you need
to be able to pay back, that's something that
entrepreneurs don't like, and more leverage
they like that, so utility is increasing
from the point of view of the borrowers in the
direction of that arrow. You can't possibly miss that
little arrow over there, and the indifference curves
are positively sloped, meaning that if I give you more leverage
because you don't like high Omega bar to get back to the same utility level as
you get more leverage, you have to get a
higher Omega bar. If you get confused and you start thinking about
that Omega bar as Z, you actually don't
make a mistake, it's not a thing. Now the banks as it describe both sides
of the market here. The banks borrow
from the households, the interest rate
that they borrow is R. My source of funds is R. I'm small
relative to you guys, I'm also small relative to
the source of my funds, so R is some fixed thing that's fixed up in the sky somewhere, and I'm going to borrow B units of currency per entrepreneur
that I'm dealing with, and then I'm going to lend
that to the entrepreneurs, and I'm going to give
the entrepreneurs a standard deck contract. I haven't told you
about the monitoring, I've said it verbally but I
didn't describe them to you. The monitoring costs
are going to be that, if you declare
bankruptcy because you have an Omega
less than Omega bar, then the bank is going
to have to buy that many goods in order to
go and observe you. They're going to have
to pay a fraction of the amount of
resources that you have. One way to think
about this is suppose the General Motors
declared bankruptcy. Well, General
Motors is a company that spans the whole globe, and to figure out what are
their resources in fact, you're going to have to
send armies and armies of lawyers and stuff like
that to go after them. If on the other hand,
you have a peanut vendor on downstairs over there who has a little cart
and is walking along the river and
declares bankruptcy, well, it's not a big deal to go in
there and investigate. What's the difference?
The difference is the assets to be investigated. We're supposing here that
the monitoring costs are proportional to the
assets that the firm has. Now the bank,
because I'm going to suppose perfect
entry into banking. The banks have a zero profit condition. They have a zero profit
condition because, well, there's no
uncertainty in banking. I don't know if you're
going to pay me back. I don't know
individually, but I also only could really care less. What matters to me
is how many of you will not pay me back and how many of you will pay me back. That is perfectly deterministic. There's no uncertainty
about that. So my revenues as
a bank are totally deterministic because
I'm imagining that I'm perfectly
diversified as a bank. My revenues are the fraction of the entrepreneurs who are getting an Omega
bigger than Omega bar. That's one minus the CDF of Omega bar times the amount
that they pay plus, and then this is what I get
from the bankrupt people. If you forget this
Mu for a second, you can see these
are the resources of the bankrupt people
that I'm grabbing, I'm adding over all
of their resources. But then I'm subtracting
this Mu because of this assumption up here to
describe what I actually get. These are the revenues
that the bank gets when it issues a standard deck contract
with parameters Z and B, and now the amount that they all households is just
this 1 plus r times b, r is a given number and the bank has to make the
left equal the right. If the left was bigger
than the right, there will be profits in banking and you
would have entry. If the left was less
than the right, then you would have losses in banking and there
would be exit. The only thing compatible with equilibrium is the left is
equal to the right here. We don't have time
to talk about this, but some people
have noticed that all the banks they looked
like they don't go bankrupt, and so that's a bad thing. There are some very nice papers actually came out of
the Bank of Japan. Three economists at
the Bank of Japan wrote some nice
papers to show how to redo this type of environment so
that you actually had risky Banks as well. But in this setup here, you don't have risky banks. Banking is not risky. Although you could interpret these entrepreneurs as banks, but anyway, okay, so
let's get the bank, the situation of the
banks cooking here. Here's the zero
profit condition. Now I'm going to substitute out ZB and get this thing over here. The next thing I'm going
to do is divide by, there's a common thing here, one plus R^k times a divide
through by that thing, and you hear we've got
that, and then you get things in terms of leverage. I now have the bank, what banking means
is zero profits, that's the only
thing it means here. That zero profits imposes
a relationship on Omega bar and l.
That's why it's very convenient to talk in
terms of Omega bar and z and l as opposed to
z and l. Because both the preferences and the situation of the
banks are given, are naturally expressed
in terms of Omega bar and l. I can graph this
little diagram here. This function here. You can see here that
if you do the graph, what you'd like to do
is you want to fix Omega bar and then compute
what the left-hand side is, and then compute L because
there's a unique mapping from Omega bar to L. You don't want to go from here to there because that's like a nightmare. You want to go the
other way around. So this is the way
the graph was done. On the vertical axis, there was a bunch of
Omega bar is computed. For each Omega bar, I computed the L
that was associated. Then I rotated the
diagram in MATLAB, and so I got that leverage on the horizontal axis and the Omega bar on
the vertical axis, and the key thing to notice
is that, well, first of all, it, that equation is only consistent with leverage
over a certain region. Then there's also a backward
bending component there. For these high
levels of leverage, there are two levels
of Omega bar, therefore to interest
rates that are compatible with zero profits. But the higher one is
of no interest because the entrepreneurs don't like they would never choose
a contract out there. You can think about
this curve here. You can think about this
curve as a menu of contracts. So now let me actually define the market environment that
I'm going to imagine here. I'm going to suppose that
the market works like this. The banks put on their windows
a picture of that curve, and people are told,
that's a menu, and people are told you can pick any contract you want
off of that menu. Then the entrepreneurs
come along and they're going to pick a contract and guess how they're
going to pick it. They're going to pick
the one that generates the highest utility for them. Well, we have their
utility map looks, these lines that
looked like this, and they're going to go
to the furthest point they possibly can over here to where they
get a tangency, and that is the equilibrium. The equilibrium concept
is that you have a menu, like you guys walk
into this room and you get this beautiful menu, and the menu specifies, okay, you want high
leverage, fine. You have to pay a slightly
higher interest rate. You want low-level fine, then you pay a slightly
lower interest rate. Why does high leverage
require high-interest rate. Well, banks are
very pessimistic. They're not thinking
about the Bill Gates. They're thinking about the
problem when you go bankrupt. The higher the more leverage, the more you borrowed
when you went bankrupt, the more of the
monitoring costs are. You can certainly borrow
more money from a bank. But the bank also realize you're going to
be a pain in the butt, if you go bankrupt and
some fraction of you will, and they're going to
charge you for that. So that's why we have this menu that's
positively sloped. Again, this is all
perfect competition here. No bank has any incentive to
put up any different menu. This literature is
a pretty standard. I look at this
stuff and it's like the IS-LM model to me in
terms of familiarity. But I've got some notation here. For example, this object here is of substantial
interests. This is the expected value of Omega that you're going to get out of people who go bankrupt. This is the expected
value of Omega, or it's the average of
the expected value, makes it sound like a
conditional expectation. The conditional
expectation, but it's the sum of the Omega is
for the bankrupt people. If you divide it by the
probability of bankruptcy, then that will be a
conditional expectation. So g of Omega is
all the Omega is the sum of the Omegas coming
from the bankrupt people. This is a sum here and this is the number for each Omega. This Gamma here is Omega
bar is this thing here, and this Gamma is the resources that the bank
gets out of entrepreneurs. Remember if we go over here, we looked at this thing. Notice that we do all
this substitution, and then you see at the very end you get 1 minus f Omega bar. Pull-out that 1
plus R^k times A. From that line to that line, you just pull out the
one plus R^k times A, and on the left was
what the banks get. What that thing is over there
is the fraction of what you guys are getting
that goes to the bank. Can you see that? Can you feel it? I wish I had an additional line there
where I just pulled out. The line above is the
same as that line except that one has 1 plus R^k
times A multiplying that, 1 plus R^k times k is the average of what all of
you guys are going to get. Because what you
individually you're going to get is going to
get that times Omega, but the average of Omega is 1. So 1 plus R^k times k is the average of
what you guys get, and what the bank gets to
keep is Gamma times that. Gamma is the name for the share, it's like a pie. You guys are making a pi
is 1 plus R^k times A, you're all getting the same loan amount because
you're all the same. You have the same preferences, so you'll pick the same contract and the bank is going
to get Gamma that, and of course you're
going to get to keep one minus Gamma of them. Anyway, that's just
notation there. It's nice to know what
this derivative is here. The derivative of
Gamma with respect to Omega bar is if you do Leibnitz rule and
bunch of other stuff, you get it's 1 minus
f, which is positive. Not surprising. When the interest rate goes up, the bank gets a bigger share
of what you guys produce. Let's actually compute the damn thing. We have to compute this
thing because this is also a computational course
and I want to show you exactly how you get this
contract into a model. Here are the preferences of the, we already derived
these preferences, the utility of the entrepreneur before just playing
around with this and you can see very
quickly that given the definitions of stuff
this is equal to that, or this is 1 minus
Gamma times that. Of course, it can be
nothing other than this because Gamma is
going to the bank. One minus Gamma has to
go to the entrepreneur, so if this somehow didn't come out to be a one minus Gamma, that'd be something wrong here, but any event, there we go. This is the utility function of the entrepreneur can be written
as this one minus Gamma, the share that they get from the profits times
this thing here. Remember I divide it by n times 1 plus r before that was
causing this to be leveraged, and that's what 1 plus
r is doing over here. The other ways this
will be an, a, this guy wouldn't be here. What they're getting
is 1 minus Gamma times their average returns. Let's move closer here, so what I'm doing
now is I'm rewriting this expression here to give me this term
here in terms of L, I just take this zero
profit condition and write it in terms of Gamma minus mu g. This is the share of what
the entrepreneurs get, make that the entrepreneur
that the bank gets. But then the bank has to
pay the monitoring costs, so the bank actually gets
Gamma minus mu times g. Then solve this thing for L, and there we have the bank
zero profit condition. Then we go to the next step and we talk about maximizing. What will the entrepreneur
select as the contract? What their utility function is, it's this times L, but L has to be
taken off the menu. It's actually this times this. Now the problem of
the entrepreneur is a one-dimensional problem. They just have to
pick an Omega bar because it has to
be on the contract, they can just pick something
off the vertical line. The menu gives them the location
on the horizontal line. You just take this thing. I don't know, I
like to log things before I maximize whatever. The first-order
condition associated with that problem is
that thing there. That's a very
important equation, and a model that
includes this stuff, that equation there
characterizes Omega bar. It characterizes the
Omega bar in the system, it's one equation and
that's the only unknown. Remember the 1 plus
RK and then 1 plus r, those are determined
elsewhere or in a DSGE model, in general equilibrium model, those will be determined
by other relations. You can think of
that equation as one equation and one unknown. Then you can take that Omega bar that's coming
out of that equation. You can compute the
implied equilibrium leveraged by going to the menu, and then you can back out what
the interest rate is from this contract by just
using that thing there. You can even talk
about something you might call the risk spread, which is a fun variable. The difference between Z, which is the interest rate at which entrepreneurs borrow, and R, which is the
risk-free interest rate at which the bank borrows. That spread in this model is due entirely to the probability
of bankruptcy and the cost of bankruptcy. In fact, when we talk
about financial friction models, to some extent, you can define a
financial friction model as the answer to a
particular question. Why is there an
interest rate spread? Why do people have to borrow at higher interest rates than other people who are the
source of funds lend that? The answer to this
model comes up with why there is an interest rate
spread is because there are actual bankruptcy
costs out there. There are other theories
like liquidity, theories of interests, risk aversion theories
of interests, all other theories this
one focuses entirely on the costs of making loans
that arise from bankruptcy. There's actually an
important result on this page because if
you look in here, we've now calculated the
equilibrium contract. We did it for a
particular value of n, but notice that now in our
calculation there is no n. We are able to
compute Omega bar, we're able to compute L, we're able to compute Z
without reference to n. That information
about the value of n of you people in this
room has been lost. It doesn't appear
anywhere in there. In particular, I
know that if I go to another room with
a different end, the equilibrium contract will satisfy the exact
same equations. This theory is telling us that leverage and Omega bar and therefore the interest
rate are independent of borrower net worth. That summarizing the
next page over here. Of course, that doesn't
mean that borrowing is independent of
your net worth, because if your leverage
is independent of your net worth then
the implied borrowing, of course, is the
borrowing is now proportional to your net worth. People with low net worth will not borrow a lot and people with high net worth
will borrow a lot. There's this thing and the interest rate is
not a function of net worth and so on. No. Why? Because, why? I'm assuming that all
the entrepreneurs are dipping into the
same f function. How many people think
that everybody dips in the world dips into
the same f function? No, if Steven Jobs
goes in and he says, "look, I put some
plastic together, I put some wires together. I put a little bit of glass together and I made something". You're going to think
it's probably pretty damn cool thing that when he made that he dipped into a pretty creative situation. If the person with
a torn shirt and the goo coming off on the
left side of their cheek, put glass together and
wires together, and so on. You know, that's not going
to be a good seat sign. In this environment here, I'm supposing that
all you guys in this room have all the
same risk characteristics. I'm saying among the people with the same risk characteristics, everybody gets the same interest rate and
the same leverage. If we made the situation a
little bit more complicated, we imagine that there
are people with different types of
risk characteristics. Then you would imagine
that people would get different interest rates, and so on according to
their risk characteristics. Now in the day, that's
probably the case that people with low net worth
pay higher interests, it's also going to
be the case that statistically the people with a high net worth have better
risk characteristics. Don't you think? Suppose you see somebody with a lot of
net worth and you know, they got their pride by
drawing from a well called F. Was that a good well, they were pulling from? I'll give you a hint, yes. High net worth is going to be, it's probably
statistically correlated with good risk characteristics. I don't want to say, I'm sure
there are people who are very evil people who have high net worth and
they have very bad risk character and
no doubt about that. But I mean, there's
correlation wise, it's probably the case
that someone who has been in business for a long time and has a lot of net worth is probably typically
dipping from a lower risk and those people would then
get a lower interest rate. Not specifically because
they have high net worth, but rather because
they're interpreted as drawing from a
low-risk F distribution. There's an issue in terms of when you actually put this
stuff into a computer, you have to actually
type in those formulas. There's an issue
about how do you type in things like f prime. Where do you get that? Where do you get
these things from? There's a discussion here. There's like a little
cheat sheet here about how you do that stuff. Me, I love this I could spend days talking about these
wonderful formulas. But I'm not going
to deprive myself and yourselves of this pleasure. Now, you can just
refer back to that. You can see here, what you get out of this
formula is just showing you if you want to evaluate
g of omega bar, you know what omega bar is
in trying to evaluate g? How can you do that
in a computer? All this shows you is that
if you go to a CDF for a standard normal
distribution and you plug in these exact parameters, then you get your g of
omega bar and this is the thing you need to
program in g of omega bar. The way you would do that is
you would just use the CDF, which is standard
in like MATLAB or you have access to it in
diner and stuff like that. Similarly with f prime, as you'd expect, the derivative of f with
respect to omega bar. This should be omega bar here. It's going to involve
the standard normal because that's what you
would have guessed. But anyway, there is
a proof of it here. Here is the key thing I want to show you in the microeconomic. I probably, I wanted to show you what the environment was, but then I want to show you a comparative static exercises. It's going to be important, which is what happens if the cooperator
static is going to be, I want to compare
the loan contract that's going to occur in equilibrium when
risk increases. I'm going to compare
two situations. One where the differences
between people is relatively small and another one where the difference is, is relatively large,
where the risk is larger. An equilibrium is
characterized by a 10 of tangency between, on the one hand, the menu, which is the zero profit curve. Here's the menu of
contracts that you get. The indifference curves
of the entrepreneurs, which I now have drawn in the space of spreads
and leverage. I'm only showing you a small
snippet of the whole space because I'm not
going all the way in both directions there. I'm imagining that we're
starting at an equilibrium, that an equilibrium where
we're in a situation like this and the difference between Z and r is 2.52
percent at an annual rate. I mean, it's not particularly important what the value is. The equilibrium
leverage here is 1.13. This starting with this thing and I want to ask the question, what happens if risk increases? That depends. The answer to that question
is what happens to the indifference curves
and what happens to the menu of contracts. If we look at the
menu of contracts, that's this and then
here's the other mirror. You see the two arrows here, this and that are
the two contract. One of the things you can
see is that when risk increases the manual
contract shifts up. Because that's exactly
what you'd expect. When risk is higher. What it says is that for a
given level of leverage, for example, this one here, you can get this. You're going to get this
particular loan again. But if you want that loan, you're going to have to pay
a higher interest rate. Why? If you take out this loan, the same loan and you pay
the old interest rate, what's the problem with that? When there's more risk, when the distribution
is spanned out more, the mean is always one. This is a mean preserving
spread on the omegas. The cross-sectional
distribution of omega is going to be spread out. Why can't the bank offer the exact same contract
that we're offering before? Because the distribution
is more spread out, it means that there are more
people on the left side, there are more people
who are making low omegas and those
people are gonna be more, there's more expenses
in banking if there's more risk
because there's more people going bankrupt. The bank, it can offer the
same loan, no problem, but it has to charge a
higher interest rate because more people are going to tip over into a low omega when there's
more spread in the omega. I feel like I'm saying something that may
not be so clear. The distribution of
omega does something and I'm spreading that
distribution out. There's the bank cares,
of course, the left side, the low side of that omega is, and there's more
people out there on the low side in that case. Anyway, the contract is, the menu, contract shifts up. Then the indifference
map also shifts in ways that are hard to describe or/and to
have any intuition about the indifference map
is still the same shape, but it also twists
around a little bit in some obscure ways when the risk goes up and you can see the new point of
tangency is over here. In this model with all the various features
of this environment, has the property that when
there's an increase in risk, what happens is that the
risk spread goes up, boom to boom, and the amount
of leverage goes down. In theory you could
end up over here. Equilibrium could go up
over there depending on how all these
curves shift around. But with this environment, what happens when there's
an increase in risk. What happens is that banks in effect have to charge
high interests and entrepreneurs end up
taking out fewer loans. That's the thing. By the way, you can
see how risk might create a business cycle. If you imagine this thing
being in a big system, you have more risk. The banks have to increase
charger at increased spread. The entrepreneurs respond
by borrowing less. Now, that per se is
not such a big deal. But then when they borrow less, they have fewer resources, they buy less stuff. We have a demand situation and we can have
output going down, unemployment going
down, and we could have this thing
creating a recession. You actually have
to load it into a big model to
actually see if that happens and that's what
I'm going to do now. I'm done with the microeconomics
of this thing now. We're going take this thing
and put it into a thing. This is going to have
to be very carefully executed surgical incision here. Yet cannot put these
frictions in any old place. You have to put it in
exactly the right place or ink and a work. The reason why the
BGG model works well is they put it in
exactly the right place. Other people like Carlston and Fierce actually
developed a model just like this and they put it in a slightly
the wrong place. It has exactly the wrong and terrible macroeconomic
implications. Where you put things, it's going make a
big difference. Here makes a big difference. The way I'm going
to describe this is I'm going to start
off by describing the standard model
and then I'm going to talk about how to modify
the standard model. I'm taking some an
intuitive approach to this. Some of you may hate this. You may prefer just
to see the equation. I want to hear the bullshit and maybe some people may
be like the who knows. Unfortunately, I'm only ready
to do the intuitive thing. Here's the standard model. You have the
households on one end, you have the firms
on the other end. The households in
the standard model, not the one with the BGG stuff and at the standard model, they are the source of all
factors of production. They have labor,
they have capital. They then rent those
things to the firms and the firms then produced up using that
production function. By the way, also
show you because I'm going to go to the data. We're not going to talk
about that too much, but I'm going to have a
whole bunch of shocks floating around so I might still tell you what all these shocks. I got a shock here and I'm going to have a shock here in the production function. This turns out to be a
Phillips curve shock. This moves prices around. This is a markup shock here. I'm going to have to
technology shocks. This technology shock here
is a unit root shock and this shock here is
a stationary shock. By the way, I remember
once telling somebody, there's a shock here and a shock there
and then they said, well, there's no way you
can tell the difference. We got two
technologies how could you possibly tell
the difference? Do you think you could
tell the difference econometrically between
these two shocks? Unit root, stationary. We spent an hour on that this morning. This model behaves
very differently in response to a disturbance here, which launches a
big demand effect and a disturbance here which has a weak demand effect associated with it because
this is a stationary shock. These are actually
econometrically distinguishable shocks. Anyway, there's a
couple of shocks, three of them for you. They rent them out and then
those guys produce stuff. Then of course,
not surprisingly, all the goods then get sent
back to the household. The household eat some of them, and the other part of them are investment goods
and the household in its backyard is busy building new capital and its capital accumulation
decision is made according to this equation here. Then they have some
adjustment cost function. This is the production function
for making new capital, which has itself a shock in it. It's called the marginal
efficiency of investment. You see that's the
marginal efficiency of investment shock. This is a shock that
previous to this, I would take the currently, the belief is that this is
the most important shock based on the model estimation
and stuff like that. This thing here comes out to be the most important shock. This shock will be removed
from its throne and will be banished in what we're going to be doing
in the next few minutes. The marginal efficiency
of investment shock is typically in standard models, comes out to be about 50 percent of GDP in terms of importance. This is like the big shock. It's a technology shock in the production of
investment goods. The households in
the standard model, they have this standard
Euler equation here, the first-order Beta marginal
utility rate of return on capital and all
this stuff governs the investment and capital
accumulation decision is wrapped up with that equation
and then also with this first-order condition here. A bird's eye view of
this standard model is that households are
the source of labor, the labor goes to
a labor market, the laborers go to the firms. The households have capital, they send the
physical capital to a market for physical capital, and then that gets rented on to the firms then at
the end of the day, consumption pours down back to the household and investment
and then the next period we continue and that's
the standard model. Well, even that standard model already has a financial friction because you often have working capital that the firms have to borrow in order to
pay for things. You already have some financing
friction in those model but we're going to add the BGG stuff here and that's going to change
life as we know it. When you put that
stuff in there, you change very much the picture of what is the set
of important shocks. Now I have to explain exactly
how this gets done and I want to repeat that it's very important exactly
how you do it. If I'm able to get
through the rest of this and I think I
might be able to I will show you the
simple intuition about why it's so important exactly where you stick
these financial frictions. In the standard model, the households have the
capital and they rent it into the market and that's a completely homogeneous
plain vanilla thing. No one ever talks
about what does that mean or anything like that. What BGG story is
going to be that actually putting capital into the market is some
special thing. There's some special creativity that only certain people can do. It's a big deal. In fact, the only
people that can do it are these entrepreneurs. It's the entrepreneurs
who are going to actually rent the capital. They are going to buy the
capital from somebody. It could be capital producers,
could be the households. It actually doesn't matter. It's a matter of interpretation. But the idea is that the
provision of capital to the markets involves something
and it's like magic. Again, you think
about capital as wires and glass and plastic. Some people who take wires, glass and plastic
and provide it into the market it's gold and some
people do it and it's not. It's the entrepreneurs who
are involved in that thing. The BGG idea, makes
a big deal out of this one thing
that never actually, in my experience ever was
even discussed before. Then we get into the conflict of interest because
the entrepreneurs, they have their own resources. They're going to
buy the glass and stuff and then they're going
to put it into the market. They do with their own resources plus they also borrow and then there's asymmetric
information about what actually happened with
this glass and plastic. Glass and plastic
doesn't work and then no one knows what
happened, what didn't happen. You need to have
bankruptcy costs and it's just a cloud of, the entrepreneurs
know what's going on, but no one else does. We can't have the standard
sharing contract. Let me do the picture here,
the helicopter picture. Again, we're going to start
out with the households. Households are the
source of labor, goes to the labor market. Labor goes to the firms. Now, the capital is not
coming from the households. The capital is coming
from entrepreneurs. The capital is owned by entrepreneurs and then at the end of the period
is production, consumption goes down
to the households. Investment goes to some
capital producers. These are the people
who make the capital. The entrepreneurs
are going to sell all of their capital to
the capital producers. By the way, those
capital producers could be the
households themselves. It actually is a
matter of notation, really there's nothing
substantive here. The entrepreneur
sell the capital to the capital producers. Then after that, what happens
is dinnertime, it's quiet. Nothing happens for a second. Then people wake up. The households now lend
money to the banks. The banks are now going to make loans to the entrepreneurs. The key thing to notice is that now the entrepreneurs have only cash because they sold the capital to the
capital producers. The entrepreneur's net
worth is well-defined. If you're serious
about net worth, you'll realize that
actually net worth in practice is not well defined. Like in my own case, I don't
know what my net worth is because a big part of my
net worth is my house. I haven't sold my house
anytime recently, so I don't really know what my net worth is, and most firms, you also you don't
really know what there's a lot of uncertainty
about what a firm's. When you lend to somebody it's not clear what
people's net worth is. This environment
here we're making it very clear by having
the entrepreneurs actually just sending
the capital through a market so we know
exactly what they have. Then what they do
is they go and get these standard debt
contracts from the banks and they use the proceeds to buy the capital that was made
by the capital producers, and then in the next period, they rent that capital. The job of the entrepreneurs, it's a weird thing. If you never went outside in your whole life and all
you did was you study the standard economic model you would not understand this at all because this
is always viewed as an invisible not
important thing, which is the placement of
capital in the market. But these guys are making
a big deal out of that. Another way of looking at this is that it's the picture
that we had before. The households are giving
money to the banks. The banks are going to be giving loans to
the entrepreneurs. The loan that's
going to be given is a standard debt contract and the mean of those things
is all equal to one. I've now changed the notation
a tiny, tiny little bit. Remember, this is a
log-normal distribution. Log-normal distribution
has two parameters, the mean of the normal that's in the log distribution
and the variance of the normal that's in
the log distribution. But those parameters shrink to one parameter when I impose that the expected
value is equal to one. That one parameter I'm going
to call the Sigma and that Sigma I'm going to suppose is moving around randomly over time and moving therefore
the contracts around and moving the whole economy around and we're going
to find that that accounts for nearly
50 percent of the fluctuations in GDP. This is all linearization, so these are all first-order perturbations that we're doing. Remember, the result
I showed you at the very beginning was that
G_Sigma was equal to zero. That a change in a variance has no first-order impact
on decision rule. Well, here we have
a variance that mattering and it has
a first-order impact. It seems to contradict the result that was
described this morning. In fact, it does not,
but it seems to. It's more a semantic problem. As the Sigma moves around the cross-sectional
distribution of productivity of the
entrepreneurs changes, and that has a
first-order impact on the parameters
of the contract. This Sigma here has a
first-order impact. We don't have to
go to third order, fourth order things to
get this guy to work. This Sigma here, which is a cross-sectional distribution, has a first-order impact
on the equilibrium. One thing you have to start
thinking about when you get into this world
is you have to start distinguishing between a cross-sectional
distribution and a cross-sectional variance
and a time-series variance. In fact, there's a great
deal of interest in recent years in
cross-sectional variances. Probably Nick Bloom
who we saw at lunch, yet as other group
here at lunchtime, was maybe a first-person to
really look at this a lot. Look at this in the
Compustat data. Look at the cross-sectional
variants of sales growth and stuff like that and how
that moved over the cycle. But now we have many more people have looked at this thing. Tao Ja has looked at this
also in the Compustat data, I have a student
Mathias Kelly who looked in the census data, cross-sectional
distribution of TFP shock. Cross-sectional stuff. I think there's going
to be an increasingly interesting thing for people. That's what that Sigma is. It's a cross-sectional thing, but this cross-sectional thing has aggregate implications. When there's more spread, the entrepreneurs are going to borrow less and they're
going to buy less capital. That's going to be a
first-order effect up to the tune of
50 percent of GDP. Now, while the
microeconomic discussion that we just went
through is useful, it delivers almost
all the equations you need but it misses one because in the
micro discussion there was only one period. We don't have any
notion of a law of motion of net worth over time. In a dynamic model,
you have to add that. Here is again an equation
that looks like this. It's an equation that you can actually spend a lot
of time talking about, but I'm not going to spend
any time talking about it. This is the net worth of an individual entrepreneur
at the end of the period. You can see what
all the components are and it's actually a
lot of fun to look at it, but I'm going to
have to restrict how much enjoyment I
get out of this thing. If you look on the net worth, the real net worth is
on the left-hand side. If you look at the sources, you can see there's
two income sources. One is the value
of their assets. The A now is actually
capital that they're buying. The value of that PK is
the price of capital and their net worth
will fluctuate as the price of capital
moves around, you get capital gains. Entrepreneurs are now
experiencing capital gains and losses in this thing
because as the price of capital moves from the time they bought
to the capital to the time they sell they make
a capital gain or a loss. They also have a
regular flow income. They rent the capital
into the market, so they get RK times K bar. Of course they're the
individual entrepreneurs that when they buy the capital, they then get their
Omega shock that either makes their capital
bigger or smaller. You can think about Omega times K is capital and
efficiency units. Your wires and plastic
are maybe much better than somebody else's wires in plastic because you
draw a higher Omega, that's what that's capturing. You can see there's the
two income effects. While there's a
capital gain effect and then the income effect, and then you have
the debt effect. These guys have to borrow in the previous period and that
shows up as a minus sign. You can see the debt
deflation effect in here too. Because if they borrow at a fixed nominal interest
rate z at time t minus one, and there's a jump in inflation, well that means
that the value of their debt has gone down and
there's a minus sign there, so that actually improves
their net worth. He had the so-called Fisher
debt deflation effects that happen in this environment, an entrepreneur who
borrows a lot of money has to pay it back
in the next period, that enters as a negative sign. But if the value of money is declined from one
period to the next, as happens when you
have inflation, then that's a boost
to their net worth. They say, this is something that one could talk about a lot more, but I'm not going to
do that here now. Here are the simple
adjustments that you have to make to a model. The first thing, if you take
a standard model is very, very simple after all,
he's bobbing around. You might think
of an adjustment. First thing you do is you
take the equation for the inner temporal Euler
equation for capital, the one that I showed
you on the first slide at out of there. You delete that equation. Then what you do
is you have to add the equations associated
with the loan contract. One equation you have is the zero profit conditions are the banks that has to be
satisfied. That's one equation. Then you have to add the
efficiency condition associated with
entrepreneurial choice. Remember that
first-order condition, that's an equation in
terms of Omega bar, got to stick that
thing in there. That's when you have to
type in the CDF things. You also have to type in the law of motion for
entrepreneurial net worth. The three equations
associated with a contract, you have to type those three
equations in and you'll also have to put
bankruptcy costs and the resource constraint. Although if you
forget, that's fine too because whatever you do, you better have those
bankruptcy costs being small because bankruptcy
costs in the actual date, there's not many bankruptcies. They absorb a tiny
fraction of GDP. If your model is any good, it should be the case that
if you forget to introduce the bankruptcy costs in
the resource constraint, it won't make any difference, but to be mathematically correct, you have
to put it in there. These are the adjustments. Let me now try to go and talk
about the results first, talk about some intuition, repeat intuition that
was done earlier. I'm going to argue that these risks shocks
have a big effect. Let's just talk
through it one more time because it's
very important to get the intuition because I want to argue
their big shocks. This is the normal CDF. Remember all the entrepreneurs
in the economy are assumed to have the
Omegas are drawn. There is a small number
when Omega is way out here and what the risk truck means is that there's increased spread in
that distribution. It widens out. The one with a higher variance is this thing here and you can see it has more
density on the left. Now what you cannot see is, well you can see if
you have a microscope, that it has more
density on the right you can see it's trying
to poke a little head-up. See the little hand
or the guy there. It's trying to be
above the blue line. It has more density on
the right and of course, if it has more density on
the left and the right, it's got to have less
density in the middle and then what you can see
there is that it has less. This is a mean preserving spread in a log-normal distribution. I'm imagining now in the
general equilibrium model that this is occurring and what do we think
is going to happen? Well, number one, the
banks become sensitive to the fact that
there's going to be more people in the left tail. The bank is not thinking
about the people in the right tail because they walk away under a standard
deck contract. Banks are aware of that. The banks have to
raise interest rates. The menu of contracts
has to shift up and entrepreneurs respond to that in the equilibrium
by borrowing less, and then when they borrow
less, they buy less. Now we know what they're buying. They're buying less
physical capital. When they buy less
physical capital, the people who make physical
capital are going to buy fewer investment
goods and when they buy fewer investment goods it's going to be
less output being purchased so employment and output and stuff
is going to drop. This is the loose intuition about how a risk
shock would work. Increase in risk leads to a higher interest rate
on entrepreneurs. They're going to
borrow less, buy less. They're going to lead
to less buying of investment goods in
the economy tanks. There's an interest in
monetary policy equation in here that's
completely standard. My nominal interest rate is a function of all this stuff. What I imagine I did was
I took a standard model, I did the modifications, I just described the
list of four things. Stick in this
monetary policy rule. Do some estimation. The fun thing about
estimation is that you now can use not just the standard macro data consumption
investment, but also you now get to bring
in financial variables. I'm going to use
interest rate spread, the difference between
BWA and AAA bond, corporate bond returns be
my measure of the spread. I'm going to have the
value of the stock market, which I'm going to associate
with a net worth of the entrepreneurs in the model. I'm going to include credit to non-financial business
as a third variable. Actually there's a fourth
thing I forgot to write there, we're all going to also
look at the slope of the term structure but I'm not going to say
anything about that. This model actually works nicely on the slope of
the term structure. Then there's the dataset that's used 1985-2008 Quarter 4. To standard estimation results, I'm not going to
tell you about it. Because we don't have time. Well. The key result is
risk shocks are important. There's a reason to think that they deserve to be taken seriously. Let
me talk about that. First thing I want to do is
I want to document to use the sense in which they're important according
to the model. The second thing I want to
do is I want to tell you is if you taught the
model how to speak English and use normal
non-jargon language, I want to tell you what
the model would tell you in answer to the question,
why are they important? What is the simple intuition? The third question is if
all of a sudden we have a shock that drives
50 percent of GDP fluctuations
but previous people who are doing estimation, they found other shocks driving it some shock
has to be demoted. I'll focus on one, in particular, the marginal
efficiency of investment. Here's an example of the sense in which the shock is important. In this diagram here, the solid line is
the actual data. This picture here
is GDP growth year over year percent GDP growth in the US and this here is
the log level of equity. That'll be the real Dow
divided by population. This is the interest
rate spread. This is credit growth and this is the slope
of the term structure, which I thought I wasn't
going to talk about, but evidently, I am
talking about it. What the dotted line is, you get the dotted
line by taking the estimated risk
shock in the data. The Sigma's that we
estimate and feed only that shock to the model. Then simulate the model response and that's what the
dotted line is. The dotted line is an
answer to the question, what if the only shocks in the data where the risk shocks, what would the history
of looked like? The answer is, history will
look roughly the same. Which is worrying a
little bit I suppose. But if you look over
here, for example, this risk shock in terms of GDP growth is accounting for
lots of the fluctuation. One thing that's interesting is it's missing on something. Notice that you get this
dip in output here. The end of 2007 is where the
current recession starts. Notice that the little
risk guy is saying, "Hey, everything is fine." Notice the dotted
line is way up high. Well, there's actually a
simple explanation for that, which is the risk
shock actually in the analysis is very closely related to
interest rate spreads. The econometric
model thinks that interest rate spreads and the risk shock are very
similar variables. In 2007, the spreads had started to rise a little
bit, but not a lot. They also rose a
little bit in 2008, but not a lot until
the end of 2008. At some sense, the
beginning of the recession, it seems like a different
animal than what happens around the time of Lehman Brothers later in 2008. This analysis here is
consistent with that. This thing is just going
along Rosalie and apparently, there's nothing
special happening, and not surprising, the
spreads weren't high. In fact, if this thing was signaling anything
other than that, I would really be
very skeptical about this partly because I'm going to defend this
model till death. Anyway, so that's that. Equity. Fantastic.
This is outrageous. The risk chunk gets
equity premium, almost the interest
rate premium, trip BWA minus AAA bond
rates are almost exactly. Credit growth is very close and even the slope
of the term structure, this is outrageous and would deserve much more discussion that I'm going to give it now, most people think that a model of this type cannot possibly
come close to explain the term structure because a model of this type
has what's called the expectations
hypothesis into it and so people think somehow the expectations
hypothesis is false. Actually, this
model suggests that the expectations hypothesis
indeed is false, but it ain't bad. That is, if you test it econometrically
you will reject it but it's going to say
that the hypothesis goes a long way and this is one of the symptoms of
that proposition. Anyway, that's one indicator of the importance
of the risk shock, the proposition that
it's important. Here's another
indicator which is the actual variance
decompositions associated with the shock. He gets 49 percent of output, 63 percent of credit
movements slope with the terms it
gets various things. You can see it big
time in the spread. The econometrics thinks
that the spread is the same as the risk shock.
Now next question. Why is it that the
econometrics is deciding? It's a very simple
reasoning I think. Number 1 the econometrics thinks it's decided
on its own that the risk shock is the same,98 percent of the
interest rate spread is the risk shock is
what it's saying. That's one thing. The econometrics notice that. The second thing is
that what's well-known, I won't document that for you. The risk spread is strongly negatively correlated with GDP. That's a well-known thing, goes back as long as we
have data that in booms, the risk spread is low, the BWA versus AAA
bond rates are very low and in recessions
that spread is very high. You're starting to see here why the econometrics starts
putting things together. I think the risk
shock is a spread. I know that the spread
is counter-cyclical, must mean that risk
shock is important. Actually, we need one more
step. The crucial step. The crucial step is that the model sees and understands and I'll show
you that in a second. That in the model, the risk shock generates something that looks
exactly like a recession, it generates a dynamic response. It looks exactly like
an actual recession. You put A, B, and
C together, done, I'm surprised model
has concluded 90 percent of GDP fluctuations are coming from this risk shock based on this argument here. The one thing that I need to document for you is the C here. The A I've already
documented it, I showed you that in the
variance decomposition, the B is, I'll just
tell you that's a standard result and
C needs to be shown. This is the response
of the economy to an unexpected movement,
the risk goes up. It's an AR1, you can't see it, but it looks just like
the interest rate spread. It goes up and then
it comes down. That's the impulse here. Then you can see what's
happening in the economy. If we look at credit, credit declines right away. We would have
anticipated that from the micro when the credit goes down the risk shock goes up. The interest rate
spread responds by going up in the model,
credit goes down, investment goes down, output goes down,
net worth goes down. Why does net worth go down? Well partly because
GDP is going down so the earnings of
entrepreneurs are declining and so their income
is going down plus they're making capital losses because there's less capital
being bought, the price of capital goes down. They're making capital losses, so the net worth goes down
that's the stock market. Sorry, I probably scared you. That's the stock market. The
stock market is going down. Inflation goes down because
the economy is going down, marginal costs are going down. Another thing that goes down is consumption That's a little
bit of a weirdo thing. In fact, there're lots
of economists out there. Even though in our day and age, I think everybody is supposed to play the rules and simulate, no there are a lot of
people just sitting around chairs chatting. There's a bunch of
people out there who say that obviously, a risk shock can't be a serious business cycle shock because it's going to
make consumption go up. Why is it going to make
consumption go up? Because a risk shock makes that inter-temporal technology
less attractive. Sending money into
temporally saving and that involves more monitoring
costs and all stuff. The economy will naturally
substitute away from that towards the alternatives, which include leisure
and consumption goods. There are profound
economic thinkers who think that consumption
that arise in response to such a shock, but it actually
declined in this model. By the way, the reason that it
declines is fun, which I'll briefly mention. This reasoning, that
I just described about how the risk track screws
up in a temporal margin, and then they substitute away into consumption and leisure, that's come straight out of
a real business cycle model. If you put this into a
real business cycle model, the rich shock would
make consumption go up, make investment go down. Of course then it can't
possibly be an important shock, because in the data consumption and investment move together. If you have a shock
that does this, no good, you got to have a
shock that goes like that. Now in the real
business cycle model, when the intertemporal
margin gets screwed up, you can think of high risk
as high tax on saving. I have a paper where I formally show them mathematical
isomorphism, between a real business
cycle model and a tax on. You can think about
high-risk is like a tax on the
intertemporal margin. The way the real
business cycle model works is that when there's this reduction in demand coming from a decline
in investment, the price of current goods goes down versus the price
of future goods. By the way, what is that? The price of current
goods versus the price of future goods? That's called the
real interest rate. The real interest rate drops in a real
business cycle model, enough so the consumption rises, and goes above what it is here. In this model, it's not
consumptions falling. Anybody got an answer
to that question? Why is it that consumption
is falling and not rising? Think about the Dynare
exercises we did. Dynare, Taylor, weakness, it's the
damn Taylor rule. The Taylor rule is
operating here, and the reason why
consumption doesn't behave as it does in the real
business cycle model, as it does actually under
the efficient allocations, is because monetary policy is governed by the Taylor rule, and the Taylor rule is weak. It doesn't cut the
interest rate enough, and that's why
consumption falls. Anyway, consumption is
falling, and so on. By the way, there's
another shock in here the marginal
efficiency of investments, so we can ask,
what does that do? That used to be the
marginal efficiency of investment shock, before this anyway, is viewed as the
most important shock driving the economy by far. Notice that if you don't look at any financial variables,
credit, interest rate, spread, net worth, then actually the two
models look very similar, it's screws up a little bit on consumption, but who cares? The key thing to notice
there is notice that the marginal efficiency of investment shock when
it makes output go up, it makes the value of
the stock market go up, which is completely
contradictory. Let me talk about that
for just a second. The thing is that in
this environment, when you bring in the
financial variables, net worth credit, and the
interest rate spread, the econometrics does not like the marginal efficiency
of investment shock, and it much prefers
the blue line, which is the risk shock. Let me just explain
panel E there for you. This will also give
you an insight into why it matters where
you put financial frictions. One way to think about to
get the intuition here, is to think about the market
for capital in this model. On the horizontal axis, I've got the
quantity of capital, on the vertical axis I've
got the price of capital. There is a downward sloping
curve, that's the demand, there's an upward sloping curve, that's the supply of capital. That's the people who buy investment goods
and they operate the capital
accumulation equation, they are the
suppliers of capital. The marginal efficiency
of investments shock is on the supply
side of capital, affects the marginal
cost of producing, and this Gamma, the risk shock here, is on the demand side because it affects the ability of
entrepreneurs to borrow, and so it moves the
demand curve around. The vertical axis,
the price of capital, is a key input into the net
worth of entrepreneurs. In fact, it's probably
the major input, because that moves
around so much in the data and in the model. If you get confused and
you think about that is just the stock market,
that is just fine. This is not a
Tobin's Q theory of the stock market,
but that's okay. Now imagine you take the marginal efficiency of investment shock
and move it around, it's going to move the
supply curve around. Suppose you move it so that the supply curve
shifts to the right, what happens to the
quantity of capital traded? Marginal efficiency moves the
supply curve to the right, makes it easier to produce. What happens to quantity of k? Up. Quantity of k goes up
means investment has to go up. It means that output
is going to go up. We're going to get pro-cyclical investment out of this thing. What happens to the
price of capital? Down. This thing predicts
that the stock market is going to collapse when
you get an increase in output due to the marginal
efficiency of investment. Now, let's go to the other side. Let's think about
shocks to the risk. You have risk moving around, suppose the risk shifts
the demand to the right. You're going to get a boom, you get more investment,
you get more output. In terms of output and the terms of the standard
macroeconomic variables, these shocks are going to
be hard to tell apart. But when that risk improves
and you get a boom, you also get a rise in the
price of capital and you get pro-cyclical stock
market out of this thing. This is just intuition for the impulse response
I showed you. The thing is the
marginal efficiency and investment shock look great. If you're doing an analysis that does not include
financial market variables, if you look at the surge of investment and I'll
put in the 1990s, you're going to say, wow, looks like a marginal
efficiency of investment shock. But that's only true as long as you keep
your blinders on. If you remove your
blinders and you notice, for example, there was a stock
market boom at this time, then the marginal efficiency
of investment shock is a disaster for you, and that's what happens
in this analysis. What I'm going to
do now is I want to stop here with
these two slides here. The big message here is that, this risk shock is important, and I think it's important
for very intuitive reasons. If you describe this to a
normal person, they'll say, I don't need any more analysis, I totally buy your risk
shock as being important. Still, it's useful to know, is the model good enough
to actually believe it? The model fits the
data well in the sense that it does well at predicting things that were
not used to construct it. For example, it does well at
out-of-sample forecasting, which is an important
test for a model. It also predicts
well bank variables that were not used
in the estimation. We did not use bankruptcy rates, but we can use the
model to calculate what it thinks the
bankruptcy rate was, and it's fairly well correlated with actual bankruptcy rates. Bloom went out and did these
cross-sectional variants, things that I mentioned earlier, and his estimates looks
similar to our risk estimates. In that sense, the model seems to fit well
in the sense that it's consistent with
stuff that was not used to construct the
model in the first place. Conclusion: Much
of the dynamics of this past data you can explain as reflecting something that
looks like a risk shock. This shock is taken as an exogenous variable
in this analysis, if you take serious
this analysis, I think the next thing to do
is to start thinking about what endogenous
mechanisms is that exogenous risks
shock standing for. I don't know if you don't have the perspective that
I have with time. I can tell you that in the
real business cycle analysis that all started out with
treating a technology shock, is an exogenous shock. That's the way real business
cycle analysis work. It was a damned good shock, and every time something
bad happened in the world, it's amazing the technology
shock always went down. You even go to the
East Asia crisis 1998, you see a collapse and output,
major technology down. Every time something
is bad, TFP is down. What has happened with the discovery of the
importance of this thing, which was initially
called a shock, there's a lot of
research done to figure out what are the endogenous
determinants of TFP, so people talk particularly
about financial frictions, but the misallocation of resources is explaining
TFP movements. I think a similar
thing happens here, you want to think of
a shock as a box. It's a box and you
have lots of shocks, and you fit the data in all these boxes and the boxes that turns out to
be the biggest, the one that can
carry the most data, that's the one when
you want to put your resources and think about. I interpret these results here, as suggesting that
it's useful to think more about the shocks that look like what we're
calling here risk shocks. 