Adair Morse: Let me
start with a bit of a numeric picture of delegated
institutional capital. If we think about the institutional total
worldwide assets is 64 trillion in 2012, which is a large number. I can't move. If you compare that to the retail mutual
funds for example, which are 27 trillion, we know a lot about
retail mutual funds, we don't know as much about
the institutional capital, the performance and profiling, how these investments were made. Institutions delegated
the vast majority of that money, 48 trillion. By the way, that is 29 percent of worldwide investable assets. It's a large chunk
of the market. If we break down
that 48 trillion, we see a small
part of it goes to the institutional mutual funds and the vast majority
of it goes more directly to asset managers in investment vehicles that are
small numbers of clients, either solo or small
numbers of clients. The asset managers combine the strategy level allocations into what we're going to
call asset manager funds, and they do this for
reporting reasons, which we'll talk about. Now there's very little money. There's very little
research despite the huge size of this market. That partially has to do with the 1940 Investment Company Act, which doesn't regulate
this market like it does the retail side. There's a lot of prior
work on asset managers and this doesn't do
fairness to the literature. There's a smaller literature
on asset managers specifically and
Lewellen, for example, he was here has a nice
work on the sector, but basically, the
study of asset managers themselves has been hindered by a lack of data
which we were able to get access to better data than at least what we think it better data than it's been had before to study this sector. What we were able to get access is to a
consultant database. The consultants assist
the pension funds and other institutions in doing their delegated asset
management into strategies. Goyal and Wahal document
this as the vast majority, is like 80 percent or
something this large, that goes through consultants
when they're delegating. In order to facilitate this, the asset managers
think the BlackRocks. The BlackRocks then report their performance to
the strategy level. Strategy level think
something like Asia value or Australian equities or some sort of fixed
income special strategies that they report. They aggregate up
the information, all the investment vehicles from different pension funds and endowments and so forth and they pull them together and use a fun level structure
that they provide data to the consultants and the
consultants then put this in a database that
they use to advise their pension fund endowment
clients and the like. We were able to get
one of these databases with quarterly assets
under management, client counts, fee structures, and monthly performance.
It's large. It's 22,000 asset manager
funds representing over 3,000 asset manager firms and
25 trillion in 2012. That's a large number. Now, of course we care about the quality of these data
and I'm not going to have much time in my 20 minutes
here to go through the different tests that we do and understanding
the quality. Let me just highlight
a few things. The consultant, one of
the important features of the consultant is audits on the asset managers
and on their funds. Also the managers, which we're just learning more from
our discussant and the managers take very seriously the GIPs compliance of reporting the accurate
returns and profiles. In the database we have the creation date and we also had dead products where the
assets go down to one. Incubation or
survivorship biases are not a problem for us we believe. We do a few tests
following Blake, Lehmann, and Timmermann in terms of the representativeness
of the data and the selection then we're going to show some
robustness and I'm going to skip that in
the interest of time. But what we find, is just
highlighting one point is on selection that we don't see that the firms
that report more of their assets under
management perform worse, which would be consistent with selection like we see in
the hedge fund literature. Let me first profile the
consultant database. These are in billions of
dollars, the units here. You see at the bottom, the bottom row, 2012, there's 27 trillion in the consultant's
database representing about 60 percent of what
pensions and investments says is the institutional
delegated assets. Then we have the backfill
data which we can parse out. Importantly, our consultant database covers 83 percent of asset management firms, and the ones we looked up, the ones that we're
missing they tend to be smaller insurance
or smaller banks and then some firms and
asset managers in Southern Europe where
the consultant is not covering these data
either because their retail clients or because of the reporting requirements. The first thing,
let's profile what an asset manager
fund looks like. Let's focus on the medians
rather than the means. We also have the institutional
mutual funds in here, so the skew is enormous. If we look at the mean, the
mean asset manager fund has 285 million in it
representing six clients. Those are mandates of about 50 million per client. It's very different than
obviously a mutual fund. We're using the word fund as an aggregation of a small
number of clients here. There's more fixed income in our database than
there's equities. The second thing,
turning to fees. Now, obviously there's an interest in the
literature since the work of Philippon and Greenwood
and Scharfstein about the cost of financial
intermediation. We can do some back of the
envelope calculations here. The Greenwood and Scharfstein
estimates suggest that securities intermediation
itself accounts for 726 billion and fees per
year or cost value-added. In terms of securities
intermediation, if we do a breakdown
using the percentages from French and also from
Barber, Nodine, et al, we can see that retail
mutual funds account for 87 billion of
that more or less, 300 individual
trading, but there's no aggregation on the institutional
asset management side. We provide an estimate of that. We have fund-level data on fees. For each of our 22,000, we know the fee structure where the fee structure is
not just one number, it scales with the
size of assets under management and if
we use these data, we come to 172 billion per year in fees paid to
institutional asset management. That's a large number. Let's look at what that
means on a basis point per asset under management and see if this passes
the sniff test, if you will, our average valuated fee per asset
is 47 basis points. As one would expect, and one would hope public
equities cost more than fixed income and then asset blends and hedge
funds in particular, hedge funds to asset
blend that siblings are mixture of fixed income
and public equities. The next thing, having looked at the profile and at the fees and we want to then start
to look at returns. The first look we do with returns is the
aggregate returns just subtracting out the broad
asset class benchmark. We use successive
class benchmarks that is shown there and we're just subtracting out that asset class returns here to
calculate the gross Alpha. We find somewhat
surprisingly that the Alpha both in gross
and net is positive, 119 basis points
gross and 72 net, which means that
the average dollar earns 119 basic points
about the market. Notice we're not saying
anything about risk here, it's just a subtract out
the market calculation. But we do this calculations
for two reasons. First of all, we want
to draw attention to the tracking error. Note that these tracking
errors are also large in line with active retail
mutual funds tracking here, which means remember that the delegated institutional
asset management is twice as large as the
retail mutual fund sector, so the literature on
active management, misses two-thirds of the market. It's suggested for
future understanding what active means and the whole literature on active management. The second reason we look at the aggregate gross Alpha is simply adding-up constraint. The idea here is that if
asset managers achieve a gross Alpha of
119 basis point, that's 29 percent of the market. Just doing a little math here, that implies that
everyone else's returns are 49 basis points lower than the market by
just adding up before fees. If you put that in dollar terms, that's 432 billion per
year than everyone else. Suggesting the incidence
of returns is very important and thinking further about the incidence of returns, if we divide that 432, 172 as we said before, it goes to the
asset managers and 260 to the institutions. These are some large numbers. Finally, we get to being able to take the returns and think
about performance. We didn't say anything about
risks or performance in those calculations of gross
Alpha, but now we want to. We take a very
specific institutional perspective here and institutions the way we'd
like to think about it and after dwelling on
this for a long time, is institutions typically have a two-step process
where they run a portfolio choice
model to determine the strategy
allocations taking into account the returns and
the covariance as such. Then if they are going
to externally manage those strategy allocations and they choose among
asset manager funds. What this means is that
performance assessment for a foreign institution is that they are interested in the net Alpha calculation
and the tracking error. These mandates bring with them the incentive to
maximize the net Alpha relative to a strategy level benchmark because they are doing these allocations on
the strategy level. This is how we're going
to measure performance, is we're going to
look at net Alpha relative to strategy
level benchmarks, and we're going to look
at tracking errors. Now, we are benchmarking
each fund in one of 235 strategies and that many benchmarks and we're just aggregating these up
to the broad asset classes, but there's a lot
more benchmarks than there are
asset classes here. What we find is that across the different asset classes in aggregate a 96
percent gross Alpha relative to strategy benchmarking
in a one factor model, and notice that the
Beta here is 0.88 and it's lower than one relative
to the strategy benchmark. We also see a
positive net return of 49 basis points, significant. The tracking errors are in line with the research and also are still active large but much smaller than
what we saw before. The first thing we wanted to
do after we ran that is to understand what is the
source of the performance. Now, if we just look
at the bottom row here and starting on
the right-hand side, we see there starting
in the middle, Asset class benchmark returns
a Sharpe ratio of 0.18, it represents a return of 3.95. If we look at the strategies that the asset
managers are doing, the strategies they are picking
within the asset classes have a higher return and
higher standard deviation, but a higher Sharpe
ratio in general. But even above that, the asset managers themselves, with the same standard
deviations as the strategy benchmarks are exhibiting a higher return, which means that
they are generating Alpha even within that strategy. It's not that they are
taking on more risk, is they're taking on similar
risk but as we saw before, the Beta was less than one, so they are taking on different
risks than the strategy. We do a number of
robust things along these lines to think about our sample
selection possibilities, which we don't find evidence of sample selection
driving this. Then of course, we're
very much concerned about benchmarking
and making sure that our results are not about gerrymandering and we talk
more about that in the paper, but in the interest of time, I'm going to go to
what we next to is think about what
explains this performance. When we were starting
to think about this, if you look at what asset
managers say they're doing, they say things like Smart Beta, tactical factors, the language. As we thought about it,
this language really is representing, is equivalent
to the Sharpe 1992 model. The Sharpe 1992 model
takes tradable factors, and we implement this, for each fund, they load
the fund returns on the factors and constraining the weights on those factor
loadings to be equal to one. Then it recovers a
mimicking portfolio, a style portfolio that
loads on these factors. Then out-of-sample,
we can compare fund returns to those
of the style portfolio. This is just implementing
Sharpe '92 and when we do, you see the weights like take, for example, the
second column there, the weights in the US equities
load on the US equity, the type of factors you would think that
they would load on, these are the weights sum
up to 100 at the bottom. In terms of performance, then using those weights, these estimates are comparing the fund level returns to
that of the style portfolio and what we find here is
that the style portfolios explain how asset managers achieve the positive net Alpha. In other words, there is the return here the
Alpha is basically 0, because Alpha is basically 0, and so above that, which you could
have achieved with a smart Beta portfolio
implementing Sharpe, there is no excess Alpha. It suggests that
within the strategies, the asset managers are taking factor exposure to outperform
the strategy benchmarks. I'm going to skip that, this then suggests
the next topic, if that's all the asset
manager is doing, could institutions have
done this themselves? If they had known the factors, if they had known
how to implement this sort of portfolio that
just loads on the factors, with the asset class weights they actually expose
themselves to, could they have done
just as well by just doing their own
factor exposures? What could they have done as a self-constructed
portfolio where they could have used
institutional mutual fund? More recently, ETFs and
we'll talk about that, but within the period, they could have used
institutional mutual funds. What we do is we
collect those data and the asset class weights from
the consultant data and we construct mean-variance
optimal portfolios, in particular, long-only
portfolios such that the pensions or other endowments might have done themselves. Then we can compare
performance, and in particular, what we're interested in
is indifference cost. What costs would
make institutions indifferent between
delegating and managing in-house using
institutional mutual funds with the factor exposure? That is the exercise we do here. Let me focus on
these numbers here. This is the asset manager data. Then we have the replicated
portfolio where they do a mean-variance analysis with either short sale constraints or diagonal covariance vectors. The indifference cost here is somewhere between 43
and 73 basis points. Let's interpret that. That means that if the institutions could have
implemented this fact, first of all, had known to
do this factor portfolio, and secondly, they
could have implemented it with a cost somewhere not higher than somewhere between 43
and 73 basis points, they would have done just as well as had they gone
to asset managers. If the cost is higher than that, then they would have been better off with asset managers. Then in panel B,
what we show here is the actual cost of the institution mutual
funds in the period. These are weighted to the
actual weights that we used in the data and if we
look at the median, the cost is 86. If we look at the quartile 1, the cost is 65 basis points, which is about the same as
somewhere between 43 and 73. Let me interpret that. This analysis suggests to
us that during this period, the institutions could have
done just as well, but not better, than using
asset managers if they had known how to implement their own
factor exposure and then implemented
these portfolios. Or another way to say it is
asset managers just earn their keep for 172
billion in fees per year during the implement, but they did earn their keep. That is what this analysis says. However, in my last minute here, ETFs are cheaper now. ETFs offer an alternative to the institutional mutual funds where the price
structure is much lower. This suggests then go into my conclusion slide
that ETFs are eroding the comparative
advantage of asset managers. Let me sum up with
main bullets here. The delegated institutional
assets represent 29 percent of investable
assets, it's enormous. Institutions pay 172
billion in fees annually. The delegated capitalist
is prominently actively managed and
then literature on active management should
think about that. In aggregate, gross
Alpha overperforms the market by 119 basis points, which means everyone
else's returns are 49 basis points
below the market. From an institutional
point of view, asset managers outperform
strategy benchmarks by 96 basis points and their Sharpe analysis show that that's
due to factor loading. If we take that lesson from the Sharpe
analysis and implement it in a portfolio that the institutions could
have done themselves, it suggests that
during the period, they were largely indifferent and so the asset managers earn their keep at 172 billion. However, now the
low-cost liquid ETFs are likely to erode that
comparative advantage. 