Raghuram Rajan: We've had
a series of crises in the last 40 years or so. Starting with the SNL crisis, the Latin American debt
crisis, the Asian crisis, then the Argentinian and
then Brazilian Crisis, and the global financial
crisis most recently. What I want to do is we've had about 10
years since the crisis. I want to talk a
little bit about the proximate causes because there's been a fair
amount of research recently and give you a theory of what the causes might be. I want to relate
that to liquidity. I'll tell you why I'm doing
that once I've finished. Once I talk about why liquidity may explain how
we got to the crisis, I want to talk about
one of the problems that we saw in the crisis. Here is a graph of
the distribution of financial conditions
across countries. Higher is easier. What you see is leading up
to the financial crisis. You have a tremendous easing
of financial conditions. Then during the crisis, you have this extremely sharp tightening of
financial conditions, which very soon alleviates. By the middle of 2009, you see financial
conditions alleviating. Now of course,
since then we have a tremendous infusion of liquidity by central banks and financial conditions have
become much easier since then. I want to talk a little bit today about the lead
up to the crisis, and what happened
during the crisis, and then end with some
speculation of what we have now. Leading up to the crisis, what we see is extremely
easy financial conditions. Here are two graphs taken
from various papers which essentially say that one
monetary policy was very easy. If you look at Taylor
rule residuals, they were largely negative
over the period leading to the financial crisis in Europe. If you look at standards
for corporate loans, which is another measure of
corporate credit tightness, you see that was also
very easy and tightened, soon after monetary policy
started tightening. Remember the ECB started
tightening before the crisis. Financial conditions
also started tightening, whether it's taken
as corporate loans or lending standards
for mortgage loans. Similarly in the US and here, the time for this graph
is a little different, but focus on the
right-hand side. If you look 2001,
2002 onwards again, you see Taylor rule residuals
are negative in the US suggesting monetary policy was quite easy relative to the past. You can look at financing
conditions lending standards are easy tightening
before the crisis, and similarly for
mortgage loans. What are the consequences of
easy financing conditions? What Borio and Lowe drew
our attention to, way back, was when you see a combination of high credit growth
and rising asset prices, you should be screaming fire because things get
bad after that. More recently, we've
got a number of papers which do it in more detail. When you have frothing
credit markets, you have strong credit growth, as well as very low
credit spreads. In fact, Krishna Martijn Morris, show that before a crisis, the credit growth and spreads
are negatively correlated. Just to show you the graph, what you see is
spreads are really low around the time the
prices dots spreads widened. These are credit spreads just before the crisis,
credit spreads widen. Look at the path
of credit growth, which is on the right-hand side. Again, credit expense
substantially until the point of crisis, then it starts contracting
substantially. GDP similarly, growth is high before the
crisis and then contracts. The question that you want
to ask is what's going on? Obviously, in these
kinds of graphs, you can offer a behavioral
explanation that perhaps what's going on if people don't
anticipate the crisis, and then things switch around
once something happens. Let me offer two sets of explanations that
are behavioral. One is the agency behavioral. The classic example of
the agency behavioral, hard behavior in banking
markets is perhaps the most famous statement
made before the crisis, which was by Chuck Prince, the chairman of Citibank, who essentially said for the FT, when the music stops
in terms of liquidity, things will get complicated. But as long as the
music's playing, you got to get up and dance, and we're still dancing. That to many was the
classic statement about her behavior. I actually met him at a
conference once and I asked him. Why did you say that? It was interesting. Because it was a very
thoughtful response. He said, look, I had a whole bunch of investment bankers
who were doing deals. I saw the quality
of deals falling. But the point was if I stop
them from doing more deals, they would have walked, they would have
left immediately. Getting people is tough. In an attempt to
preserve the franchise, so to speak, I had to them go
a little more to the edge. Now, of course, he was making a calculation that
retaining these people was more important
than the cost to the balance sheet in terms
of deteriorating credit, and it came back to haunt him. But nevertheless,
there was a rationale, which is since everybody's
going, I got to keep going. The various hard behavior models is sometimes based on I got to keep up the pretense that I have really good credits and
have really good business, otherwise the market, my
stock price will tank. Let me keep up that pretense
by making additional loans, ignoring the losses or papering over the losses, evergreening. You can write down more
like this and I have. But the point is that these are all in a class of
behavioral models. Then there is the true
behavioral model where your beliefs in some sense
are affected by what you see. I think the classic
paper here is denial. I'm going to apologize
to deny only. Shleifer and Vishny, which is about the fact that if I see a
string of good news, I tend to overweight the probability that good
news we'll continue, the conditions will
remain really good. I think that is in a sense
representative of conditions. Of course, once I
start seeing bad news, it takes some time
for me to flip, but eventually I flip and then I go exactly
the opposite way. I veer from over-optimism
to over-pessimism. There is work by Geanakoplos,
where essentially, when you have a combination of the possibilities
of leverage, as well as a variety of people, optimists and pessimists. Because the optimists can
borrow to invest in assets, you get a preponderance of
optimists in the upswing. But then when you get
to the down swing, because these are
highly levered, they go bust, they
go out of market, and now you have a preponderance in a sense of pessimists and you get a switch in
terms of asset prices. These explanations could be useful in seeing that
abrupt shift that we saw. What I'm going to try is an explanation
associated with liquid. It's not testing these
other models and saying my model is better than your model or anything
of that sort. I'm offering you a model
based on liquidity, because I'm going to offer you actually two models
based on liquidity. Liquidity, bad is the first, liquidity good is the second. Then we're going to talk
about policy implications. Back to the question,
why does leverage increase and spreads decline? Why does the real
recovery take so long? What role does liquidity or easy financing conditions play? The argument here is going to be that when you have
plentiful liquidity, when you have easy
financing conditions, there's a certain form of borrowing that is encouraged
and that picks up. But in that process when
money is really easy, other forms of enforcing
borrowing get neglected. Those are forms of enforcing repayment which are very
valuable in bad times. But because times are so good, you tend to neglect that. Then when the bad times come, there's nothing available. Because the
liquidity, which made for easy boring and the
good times has disappeared, and this other
source of enforcing is not there because
you didn't need it. The connection between the
two is made by leverage. That's the first part. I'm going to talk about that. Then I'll talk about the spike downwards, why that might. The point in the
paper that it's with Doug Diamond and Kyung-Seok
Hu, from North Carolina, is that expectations of high
future liquidity can make the subsequent
downturns much worse. This is not just through
changed expectations leverage, but it's through
some real change. I'm going to talk about that. Trust me, no Greek
alphabets, nothing here. I'm going to walk through three or four slides explaining the details of the model, and it should be
relatively easy to catch. When you think about
debt contracts, what are the ways that debt
contracts are enforced? Well, one way, largely popularized by
Oliver Hart and John Moore, is through an asset sale; the creditor can threaten to seize and sell the
firm to an acquirer. This is something
that works very well, when there is a boom, when there's
plentiful liquidity, whereby liquidity, we
mean the capacity of bidders to pay because of
their own wealth and so on. When you have wealthy
industry insiders, they can buy any asset
that is put up for sale. That makes the asset
very good collateral to borrow against, and that makes it very easy for creditors to enforce
debt payments because they just
seize the assets, sell it to somebody else
in case you refuse to pay. For example, in the
construction industry, when you have
plentiful liquidity, when there's easy financing
available or round, what happens is
there are plenty of people who want to
take on mortgages. They get those mortgages. Now think about what happens
in construction companies. Construction companies are able to build the house and
sell it immediately. Lots of construction
companies sitting with lots of wealth because they're
making money hand over fist. Any kind of asset in this
construction industry, including construction firms, become very liquid
in this environment, because you have
very easy financing, and that flows back to firms. Now this is an
environmental thing, is exogenous to the firm. A second way that
you can borrow, which is a harder way, is not against collateral, but in some sense, by promising to have better
corporate governance. By promising that whatever
cashflows you regenerate, they will be properly
accounted for, they will go into
escrow accounts, they will be paid
out to lenders. A second way, which we
call pledging cashflows, is an incumbent manager of a firm can borrow by essentially committing to pay
whatever cash flows it generates to creditors in
case he owes them debt. If you have tighter
accounting disclosure, tighter covenants, you have
strong external governance, a strong board, essentially, you close down
what Andre calls tunnels, ways that people can take
money out of the firm; you close them down. You keep the money in the
side of the firm so that it can be funneled
to the lenders. The point about this
is it's internal. This kind of governance
is internal. It's not based on
external conditions. The firm itself is improving
its ability to repay. It takes time to set up, and it attaches to the firm. Typically many of these
institutional structures attached to the firm,
this is endogenous. Now the two modes interact. Essentially, if
somebody can borrow against the firm itself in
making a bid for the firm, they can actually pay
more for the firm. I have plenty of wealth myself
as an industry insider, but if in addition, I can borrow against the firm
when I bid for the firm, I can pay more for the firm. These two can add up. Essentially, the ability to pledge cash flows of the firm can add up to industry wealth to allow for greater
borrowing capacity. That's one way these two interact, but there's
a second way, a more damaging
way they interact. This is problematic. When there's plenty
of liquidity, when industry
insiders themselves have plenty of cash to pay, they can pay full
value for the firm. At that point, they don't need the additional pledgeability
against the assets. In a sense, plenty
of liquidity in the industry crowds out the incentive for firms
to maintain legibility. The more general point here, when financing is very easy, potential borrowers
don't have to worry about being very
circumspect, etc. They can borrow easily
against the assets, in which case, corporate
governance can go for a toss, accounting could go for a toss, forensic accountants no
longer find any business. Basically, there is a shift. Easy liquidity crowds
out other forms of maintaining
financing capacity. In the simple model, think about somebody
borrowing to buy the firm. It is possible that
the boom continues, and if we are in good times, the probability of it
continuing is high, and that's when there's
going to be easy liquidity, that's going to
enforce debt payments. In this small probability
of a downturn, be not be very small, can be small, but
not negligible. In this situation, somebody who's running a firm
has to set pledgeability. They borrowed, they have
to set pledgeability. How did they decide
to set pledgeability? Well, you have to ask, once I've borrowed, why do I need to
increase pledgeability? Why do we need to
maintain governance? The answer is very simple. If I want to borrow again, if I think I may need to
issue money in the markets, I need to maintain
that governance. If there's a prospect of
new investment projects or if I just want to sell
my firm in the market, I want to maintain
that pledgeability. That's a reason for me to do it. Now, there is this trade-off. There is this trade-off that if I increase
pledgeability, I can raise more easily or I can sell the firm for
more when I need to sell it in the market. That's good for me
as an incumbent. The downside is, if I increase pledgeability and I have a lot of
debt outstanding, I have to pay those
creditors more because now they have far more ability
to extract from me. They can threaten
to sell the firm, and if they sell the firm
after seizing it from me, they can get a lot
more because I've made it easy for bidders
to bid for that firm. Really, the incentives
for any firm in an environment of liquidity to set this pledgeability high. Remember it's endogenous, it's something that firms
set themselves, depends to some extent
on how much I think I'll need new
finance or how much I think I would need to sell
the firm versus how much I will continue to be in the
firm and need to repair. It turns out, for example, if you think about
the management of a mature firm with
few financing needs. If you're in a mature firm
with few financing needs, you don't want to maintain
any corporate governance, you never my raise money ever. You've got plenty
of money coming through operational cash flows. That's not what you need to do. On the other hand, if you're a management
buyout team which has bought this firm, you know you want to
sell it in a year. In that year, you're going
to do everything you can to enhance corporate
governance in that firm, because you want to sell it
for the maximum possible. Depending on whether
you're a firm that's going to stay in business or management team that's
going to stay in business, or management team
that's going to sell out, your incentives vary. That's one source of incentives. The second is debt. If I have a whole lot
of debt outstanding, as a incumbent
manager of the firm, I really don't want to
increase pledgeability. Why? Because if I have
to sell the firm, more of the amount I raised by selling the firm will go to pay the debt holders. On the other hand, if I increase this
flexibility significantly and make debt-holders
much stronger, if I stay in control
of the firm, again, I have to pay out a whole
lot to the debt holders. What a higher level of debt does is reduce my incentive to
increase pledgeability. We're done with all the theory. Now, what does this imply? What does this imply, is basically when you anticipate a lot of
market liquidity, it crowds out the
firm's incentive to maintain high governance. If I have a high probability in the future as a firm
of having liquidity, I have a high capacity
to repay debt, which means that lenders
today don't worry about whether I said pledgeability higher and
maintain corporate governance, etc., they're willing
to finance me, they're running with
their checkbook after me. They're saying how much
money do you want? I take on therefore
a lot more debt, but as I take on
a lot more debt, I have very little incentive to maintain pledgeability
after that. Essentially, in
these environments of high and continued liquidity, the prospect of this liquidity continuing does two things; it increases leverage, and once it increases leverage, it crowds out my incentive to maintain governance or
maintain pledgeability. That dies out. A continuing boom
is rising leverage because we know that
the leverage can be supported by the availability
of tremendous liquidity, which means the asset
can be sold for lot, and that the debt can be repaid. It means falling
spreads initially as industrial liquidity increases
and that becomes safer. But eventually, because pledgeability is
neglected at the last point, you will see spreads
starting to increase before the crisis because the debt
that's taken on is riskier. Now what are downturns here? Downturns are when
because of tightness, the anticipated
industrial liquidity doesn't materialize, so that source of debt
capacity doesn't materialize. But also over this period, we've neglected maintaining
corporate governance, maintaining pledgeability. Pledgeability-based debt
capacity is also available. In other words, debt
capacity collapses, as soon as liquidity
vanishes because we haven't maintained
anything else. You have a credit squeeze, you have spreads rising
sharply for debt, and it takes a long while
for the debt capacity to be restored because the
ways it can be restored in this model is if
pledgeability is raised, that takes improvements
in corporate governance. It means finding
good accountants, means finding
forensic accountants. It will take time. It could also happen if
industrial liquidity is rebuilt. But think of a crisis basically the industry insiders get quiz and so industrial
liquidity rebuilding could take a long time. Now, what are the
testable implications? Pledgeability falls as high
liquidity persists and there's a greater fall in industries that are
undergoing booms. Eventually, when
liquidity dries up, pledgeability increases. What's a measure
of pledgeability? Think about accounting quality. That's a measure
of pledgeability. It's whether you maintain high accounting quality or
allow it to deteriorate. Well, we have a paper done
by a colleague of ours, Mike Minnis, with
Lisowsky, and Sutherland. What you see here is
good unqualified audits. Unqualified audits are
the gold star audit which says the auditor has looked
very carefully at you. The fraction of those
audits indicates how much care you've taken to maintain
governance standards. What you see in the
blue line is for construction firms
before the crisis go up to 2007, 2008. The number of such
unqualified audits in the industry is
falling significantly. That suggesting people
aren't maintaining corporate governance
at reasonable levels. Now, in general,
there's plenty of liquidity in the country. Even for other firms, that is the orange line, it is declining, but it is declining more strongly
for construction. Of course, with the crisis, the number of unqualified
or good audits picks up, suggesting that now they've seen the light on
improving governance. What you can't see as
well as the different, diff, between these
two industries. What you see here sharply is for construction relative
to other industries the fraction of
unqualified or good audits false tremendously
before the crisis. People are just not bothering to get their firms
audited in a good way. Before the crisis, if they were in the
construction industry where everybody is making
money and there's no fear of the downside of how you would
raise money if in fact those tightness and then it picks up after the crisis. Construction improves
relative to the others. I thought this was an
interesting example. Let me then talk a
little bit about what triggered the tightness
because that also. What I have tried to explain this far is one alternative, which tells you why in a
period of high liquidity, you may actually make the
system more and more fragile, so that when that
liquidity vanishes, the system can collapse. It becomes really,
really difficult to raise money
because you haven't maintained corporate
governance within the firms during this
period of easy money. What I wanted to talk
a little more about is the tremendous tightness. What we saw was a collapse, essentially lending
as the crisis hit this very steep collapse. Let's talk about why that
might have happened and why you saw a very
fast recovery. I'm going to argue much of it was essentially in
the financial sector. We've looked at loans to firms. That's what we saw
initially and argued that spreads may have risen and lending tightened with
the onset of the crisis. But in the financial crisis, what we saw was something
far more dramatic. Liquidity dried up for a large set of
financial assets with significant price drops and the bid-ask spread just
widen tremendously. When you talk to
bankers they said there's a buyer strike
nobody is willing to buy. There's no price at
which the market clears. Even well-capitalized
entities shun lending. It wasn't that they couldn't lend, they didn't want to lend. If you saw the reserves
at the central banks, they started picking up significantly from around
the Lehman failure. This is the sharp
spike downwards, why that went down,
whether it went up. But if you look at, for example, things like bid-ask spreads, what you see is the
average bid-ask spread, that is the brown line. For derivatives on the
leverage loan index essentially went up
tremendously and then started coming down gently
towards and by about mid 2009 or late 2009, it had come back
to its old levels. Similarly, if you look
at the average bid price for instruments on this index, collapsed from about
$0.90 to the dollar to 62, 63 and then
steadily climbed up. What happened? How
did it get rescued? That's the next part of this, in the next ten minutes or so. There were lots
during this period. A lot of arbitrage
opportunities which some of the people in this room have
documented, for example, the bond CDS basis
was essentially so for those who are
less familiar with this. Essentially, you
can buy the bond, a corporate bond by
CDS protection on it, and still make an
arbitrage spread. Now that arbitrage spread
is money in the bank, provided the guy who
sells you the CDS is willing to honor
it when you go to him after the bond fails. That's a big if, that became
a big if during the crisis, before the crisis it wasn't, became a big concern during the crisis and there
was that spread. Of course, the macro
people in this room know the covered interest parity also broke down
during this time, and that's another
example of this. There are newer
arbitrage opportunities. There was a rapid
recovery in asset prices. The question there
is, what happened? Why did it recover so suddenly? Was a good news on fundamentals? Why we know the NDR
dated the recovery from, was it March 2009? But in general, there was no evidence in the
public data that there was a recovery other
than perhaps asset prices. The unemployment
stabilized only in 2010. In fact, the first month without job losses was November 2009. But by that time you see that asset prices had
recovered substantially. Similarly, if you look at
delinquencies and mortgages, these declines steadily
only in mid 2012. Just to show you two pictures, unemployment goes up
right till mid 2010, and look at mortgage
delinquencies these stay high, right till about 2012. It's hard to pin the recovery on these things what happened. I want to argue
that what happened, what stopped the
liquidity crunch was good news on institutions,
not on fundamentals. It was basically an
all-clear signal which allow you was a stress
test done by the Fed, which basically said the
big institutions are safe. Once it was clear the big
institutions were safe, the asset prices
recovered after that. At least that's the
claim I'm going to make. To do this again,
a mini model to explain why that might
have been the case. Why before that we saw
a freeze in trading, a fall in asset prices. Supposing you have
a group of banks that hold assets that
are complicated assets. All these financial
engineered securities, leveraged loan back, CDOs, etc. These were assets that once it was known there was a substantial default risk
associated with them, they had a very small market
of specialized buyers, hedge funds when you knew
a lot about these assets, BlackRock, maybe
vanguard, but very few essentially potential
buyers in the market. Now, in this framework, you don't need information
asymmetry is you just need specialized expertise in
a small set of buyers. Let's assume there
are a bunch of banks. I'm going to call them
the walking wounded. You'll see why in a second. They face some probability
that there will be a demand for liquidity on
them in the near future. Think of this, David
Shelfstain and Evashina, have a very nice
paper which shows that during the crisis, there's a tremendous demand
for liquidity from people, from firms, for example. They had been offered
lines of credit. People pulled down the lines of credit for fear that
they wouldn't get access to those lines later on. Think about the possibility
that in this situation, we either have a generalized
banking panic or we have depositors and borrowers with needs who pull out money. The walking wounded
could face a need to essentially pay out
in the near future. If they find this
needs to pay out, they have to sell
illiquid assets at fire sale prices because there's not enough competition
among its potential bias. BlackRock has a certain amount of capital they are
going to devote to this few other buyers
who can do it, who have the money, but many of the others who
can potentially buy are in an equally bad situation
and unlikely to be biased. Small set of buyers with the liquidity that they can
use to buy these assets. Just like we had industry
insiders earlier with cash, we have BlackRocks
with cash here, but it's a limited set of
buyers for the securities. What effect does this have? I'm going to argue
that when you have the potential for
fire sales you have essentially the possibility
of a total freeze in the market and the
steps are as follows. When you think there's a potential fire sale because
he's walking wounded, are going to sell
assets in the market. It implies that there's a wonderful profit
opportunity down the line for anybody
who has cash. Because these assets
are going to be sold at bargain basement prices. Falling back to today, it certainly means that assets which could possibly
be sold in the market, we're talking about CDO, CDO squared, CDO cubed. Those assets could be sold at a deep discount
in the future, falling back to today,
they're also discounted. But the discounted future when
there's a liquidity need, when lots of people are
selling is going to be considerably higher than
the discount today. If I have cash today, am I going to buy
these assets today or hold onto cash because there's a higher
return in the future? Well, I'm going to say
I need a similar return if I'm going to part
with the cash from any asset I invest in. If for example, there's a
term loan that I could make, because I have plenty of cash, I'm going to demand a
return equivalent to buying that asset at
fire sale prices. As soon as you have these high potential
returns in the market, anticipating a possible
liquidity shortage and the sale of assets
at fire sale prices, it increases the returns
for any use of cash today. What does that imply? That implies generally, I hold cash because
there's no loan I can make today at those rates of return
which make any sense, I have a credit freeze. I have a credit freeze because I anticipate this
unloading of assets. What about securities trading? What about the walking wounded? Won't they want to prepare
for this potential risks that people will come
for their money and they go belly up? The answer it turns out is no. If they sell those securities today at the discounted
price that they are at, there is cash, but that bolsters the value of depositors rather than bolstering
the value of equity. Better to hold on. If there's no shock, if I survive, those discounted assets
which are selling at a low price today, come back tremendously in value, and I look like a genius. Do I want to support
the depositors who anyway the government
will take care of? Or do I want to
look like a genius? I think the choice
is pretty clear. Essentially, the problem is in an environment where there's a risk that
the banks will go belly up, if they sell securities today and become much more liquid, they're selling those securities at a bargain basement price. But essentially they're
foregoing a put option, the option to essentially default and that is a costly
option for them to forego. Essentially, it's not
a buyer's strike, it's also a seller's strike. Nobody is selling assets
also because the price is too low given their own
particular circumstances. There's both a trading freeze, which is the guys who have
these illiquid assets, aren't willing to sell them, and as a result, become
essentially solvent. They're willing to
take the chance because they make
much more writing on that and there's a credit freeze because even for healthy banks, the rate of return
on holding cash for the possibility there'll be these investment
opportunities in the future much higher
than lending it out today. If credit dries up, you get these arbitrage
opportunities because credit is simply not
available to take them on. Lots of inefficiencies
in this framework, there are avoidable runs to lower future price
depresses lending. Banks don't internalize
the effects of their actions on
the future solvency of banks and credit decisions a point that Jeremy makes
in his 2012 paper. Importantly, they don't sell illiquid assets today even if it makes the bank
solvent and run free. What works in this environment
in rescuing the system? What prevents the freeze? Essentially, I would argue something
like the stress test, which we had in March 2009, results declared in May 2009, tremendously valuable
because it told the markets, looked at 19 big banks, and 10 of them were
asked to raise capital. The stress test was
seen as credible. But what it did was essentially
he told the markets. We ask these banks
to raise capital, if they don't have it, we have a backstop,
the treasuries capitalist system program
to help them raise capital. They will no longer be
the walking wounded. Therefore, there is no
longer any prospect that a whole set of these assets will come on the market. There's not going
to be a fire sale. Guys, the system is fine. As soon as people know
the system is fine, then credit starts picking up, people start being
willing to lend because these wonderful opportunities
to buy assets at bargain basement prices
have disappeared. Asset prices started recovering. What lessons can we take away? I'm going to end now. We've looked at two
phases of liquidity. What we saw most recently is anticipated illiquidity can lead to frozen markets
and frozen credit. That's a bad thing. Too little liquidity
can be problematic. That is why the authorities
may need to clean up the system even in
the midst of a crisis. This is important
to restore lending. Lending is on a
freeze because you fear that they will be
fire sales going forward. Liquidity infusion
or capital infusion, we can talk later
if you want about the comparison between the two, they may be necessary
to repair the markets, to essentially unfreeze them. Now, of course, once you
do a little infusion, once you repair the markets
through QE1 and so on, you could ask, why not
add a little more? Why not add a little
more liquidity? Why not keep adding it till everything becomes
hunky-dory again? That's the last part that
I want to talk about. Yes, we recovered, but financial conditions kept
getting easier and easier. Is that a good thing? This is a picture of
covenant light loans. Remember those things
which we worried a lot about before the crisis? We said covenant-lite
loans, terrible, no collateral, no
covenants, nothing. That was that little bump you
see on the left-hand side. What has happened since
we've got bigger bumps. I would argue that's an
example of easy liquidity. That in fact, it prevents you from taking appropriate
precautions. It makes the system a
little more fragile. Too much anticipated
liquidity can be a bad thing. Now, we've had to do
it as central bankers. Low for long. Yes,
there's plenty of liquidity available,
go out and lend. We hope that they would
lend to real assets. They would encourage investment, they would encourage growth. In the process, they also
took riskier financial bets. The question is, how
do we trade this off? How do we trade financial
fragility with real activity? The primary correlate I would argue is monetary
policy though I'm perfectly happy
for people to say that's not what's driving the
easy financial conditions. But if you accept that, then monetary policy and financial stability
cannot be separated. This is something
we're still debating. We have to find ways
to address because certainly in the period
since the crisis, we have built up some of the fragility that
led to the crisis. Now, it's not entirely
the same thing. Let me end by saying, the good news is the banks aren't primarily
responsible for this. It's outside the banking system for the large part.
That's a difference. Therefore, there's less of a chance we'll have
the walking wounded, which creates a
collapse in the system. That's the good news. That's what Basel has
been about all this time, about trying to remove
the risks from the bank. The problem is we don't
understand too much about the risks and the rest
of the system and we don't know how much
the banks will have to intervene to support
the rest of the system. We've made it harder
for them to intervene, but we may need them. Do we have better
or worse outcomes than the previous
time? I don't know. What is happening
is liquidity is slowly in the process
of being withdrawn. The easy financial conditions will change and we have to see whether this time around it is indeed different.
Let me stop there. 