Arpit Gupta: This work is
joined with Kunal Sachdeva, who's joining rice this fall. The motivating question
in this paper is to ask, what's the role of
inside investment on fund performance? By inside investment, I mean managerial GP commitments to their own funds under
their management. To study this question,
we're going to first have a model framework
that uses a berk and green style model to understand how inside investment might affect the incentives
for managers. The key friction in
this model are going be limited commitment and
decreasing returns to scale. Then we're going to
turn to the data. We're going to use novel regulatory information
to empirically analyze the role of skin the
game on fund performance. The way to think about
this is to imagine a hedge fund that has multiple
funds under their control. We're going to be comparing the returns on fund number two. That's a fund here in
this example that has a higher amount of
inside capital, greater skin in the
game that comes from managerial
GP commitments to the fund against another fund that this hedge fund operates. This fund number one, that has a smaller amount
of inside capital. Our key result is that a one standard deviation
of inside investment within the same firm
is associated with about 1.3 percent
increase in Alpha. We're finding that insight
investments are very strong, powerful predictor of
superior performance even when we look
within the fund family. First, I want to
motivate our model and try to illustrate
why we think capacity constraints
is the right friction to have in mind and
understanding of this result. First what I'm showing you here is a flow performance
relationship. On the x-axis, we've got
lagged excess returns, on the y-axis, I'm showing you subsequent
flows into the fund. Then breaking out insider funds, these are the ones in
red and outsider funds, those are the ones in teal. The distinction of being
the insider funds have over 20 percent of their
capital coming from the GPs, from the manager of the fund. Notice that the
outside funds here in teal have more of a standard flow
performance relationship. Meaning that when they
have a good quarter, they get more money than
subsequent quarter. That relationship comes from
the fact that investors see the superior performance of the fund and they're putting
their own capital into it. However, we don't see that relationship when we
look at the insider funds. Meaning that when we're
looking at funds that are disproportionately
managing inside money, they have a good quarter, they don't get a lot more
money the following quarter. Now, in parallel to that
result on flow performance, I'm showing you here a picture on fast return persistence. Same thing on the x-axis,
lagged excess return. On the y-axis I'm
now showing you the subsequent follow-on
excess return. Now this relationship
isn't as precise, but we see a
suggestive sign that the insider funds seemed like they have a little bit
more return persistency, meaning they have a good
quarter, one quarter. They seem to do maybe a little bit better
the following quarter. These are just
motivating facts that go into how we develop our
modeling framework, which we're then going
to use to interpret our empirical results. The model we use is a fairly standard Berk and
Green style model in which managers have access to different return technologies with different scaling costs. Each return is associated with a particular Alpha
parameter that captures how good the strategy does when you first put it in a little bit of money into it, as well as the
scaling parameter, which captures how the
returns of the strategy diminished with additional
capital contributions, or the capital in
our model comes from both insiders as
well as outsiders. Now the key differentiation between insiders
and outsiders in your model is that the outsiders are
taking fees as given, they're investing their
capital into the fund, whereas insiders are collecting both the management fees on outside capital as well as the internal returns on investing their own
private capital. They're trying to maximize
that total value-add, taking the participation of outsiders and scarce
insider capitalists mixed. The way to think about this
framework is to imagine two strategies with very
different scaling parameters. Think of the first
one here in red. That's going to be something like high-frequency trading. It's something that gives
you really high returns, but doesn't scale very well. The more capital you put
it into the strategy really diminishes the returns
that you receive on it. We think this characterizes
a broad set of strategies that hedge
funds have access to. There's another set of strategies that are
outlined here in teal. This strategy doesn't
give you as much return, but it scales a lot better. The basic framework in
this model is going to be that if you have inside
capital to delegate, you're going to first put that
into the strategy in red, you're going to earn
really high Alpha on your own private capital
and you're in stake in a market that fund in teal to outside investors earning
management fees on that money. That's going to be the basic
intuition behind the model. Now think about what happens in any given fund as you change the amount
of skin in the game. On the far left, we have the
berk and green framework. The fund size grows really large because you're just trying
to maximize management. On the right side, you've got a world in which there's only inside capital and the fund. Now when that happens, the manager has
optimized the scale of the strategy so as to
get the maximum Alpha, because they're earning all of the excess
returns themselves. In between you've got
some intermediate range where the insiders are not scaling up the fund as much as they could because they've got some capital contributions. Parallel to that, we've got
a framework on returns. Again, left-hand side, broken green framework,
there's no excess return. Right-hand side, we see funds do really well because
the managers are choosing to optimize
the scale of their strategy so as to
earn excess returns. What happens in-between
is really interesting. What's going on in
between is that the insiders are
internalizing the fact that raising new capital
is dilutive to existing investors
in the sense that it worsens the capacity
constraint of the strategy. Skin in the game acts to better align the incentives
between the LP and the GP by causing the insiders to internalize this
diluted capital raising. That's just the basic
framework of our model. It leads us to
think that as long as the scale and size
costs are going to vary, we're going to expect that hedge fund
insiders are going to allocate strategies differentially
across their funds. They're going to be putting
their own private capital across these different funds in ways that should result
in a relationship between skin in the
game and performance. It gives us some sense of
what the plausible mechanism, this capacity constraint idea. Again, the basic intuition
in this model is that insiders are trading
off scale and scale. They can earn a lot of money if they're managing
their own private money, particularly when it comes to strategies that don't
scale very well, or they can earn a lot of money on management
fees but to do that, they're going to have
to really take a lot of capital and drive those
returns down a lot. The basic friction
in the background generating this result is the idea of limited commitment. That outsiders can't fully contract with the management of the fund to commit against diluting them over raising
capital in the future. Skin in the game is acting as the commitment
mechanism here. That's just the basic
framework that we have in mind that we're going
to take to the data. We're going to use
novel regulatory data that comes from form ADV. ADV data has been used
before and other contexts, but it's been updated after Dodd-Frank to include a
lot more information. It's going to now be a
comprehensive dataset all hedge funds above
a certain size, that's going to allow us
to understand the role of inside investment in
the hedge fund industry. We're going to link this with commercial hedge fund datasets. This is going to allow
us to look at returns. We were able to link
a number of these based on the SEC
identify itself. First, let me just give
you a sense of what this regulatory form looks like. Here I've got Renaissance
Technologies. This is the Medallion Fund, the most successful hedge
fund of all time. A dollar investment
is fund in the 80s would return over $10,000 today. Distinguishing feature
of this fund is its reliance on inside capital. I want to draw your attention to Question 14 on this forum, which is what we're
going to use. This asks, what is the
approximate percentage of private fund beneficially owned by you
and your related persons. I'm going to come
back to related persons in just a minute. But basically
beneficial ownership has to do with ultimate
and ownership through Shell vehicles and so what
this is going to for us is something we think
is a good proxy for managerial
investment in the fund. This is telling us that
about two-thirds of the six billion dollars
in this fund is coming from the
managers themselves. This is really a fun that's
managing inside money. Our basic empirical
strategy is going to be to compare funds like this. Funds like medallion
to funds like reef. Reef is a fund that
renaissance technologies also operates that has about
$16 billion in size, but only 12 percent of that is coming from GP
capital commitments. This is a fund that you can access if you have a
million dollars maybe, and you're not going to get the same returns that you would get in the Medallion Fund. Back to related parties these are entities that
are listed on the forums and most commonly they
are sponsors of the GP. About three-quarters of the time they share a supervised person, about 60 percent of the time
they're in the same office. We think that this question
asks for an entity that we think economically is quite linked to the
management of the company. We're going to treat that all is inside investment
for our purposes. What this data allow us to do
is to look within firms at the distribution of
how their skin in the game is distributed
across their fun vehicles. For Rentec here we can see
they've got a range of funds, some of which have very
little skin in the game, some which have a lot
of skin in the game. We have this measure for the
entire hedge fund industry. This histogram is
telling you for every single fund
that's a hedge fund, what is the skin in the game
of that particular font? There are two interesting
modes here at zero and 100 percent so no skin in the game
and totally prompt fun. We're actually going
to ignore those for the remainder of the
empirical exercise, but results you
can also going to hold if you include
those as well. Moving on to our results. This is our basic specification. What we do in the first step is a factor correction
of returns. You can think of the Fama-French cohort
factors, for instance, we're just going to regress
a bunch of factors against raw returns in order
to extract an Alpha. That second step, we regress that Alpha against that
measure of skin in the game. We're taking these from annual
ADV form so we're taking the skin information from one year and regressing
against the returns, the Alpha from the
following year. We're looking here both at
the Fama-French cohort as well as the [inaudible]
share factors. The key result is that in one percent increase
in skin in the game is associated with about 0.5
bits of Alpha every month. To scale that appropriately, an additional standard
deviation is going to add about 1.2 percent
Alpha every year. Really important feature about that result is it comes from a panel regression in which we're controlling from
a form fixed effect. Meaning we're looking
within a firm at different funds
that they offer. The firms all have
common management, but they have different vehicles with different amounts
of skin in the game. That's the variation
that we're using in this panel contexts and we're finding that it's variation inside investment within
firm within year, within strategy
controlling for size, that's associated with
very strong predictor of superior
performance of Alpha. To having established
this relationship between skin in the
game and performance, we now are turning to understanding some
of the mechanisms. Remember we have
this framework that suggested that capacity
constraints could be driving. We think very
strong evidence for capacity constraints comes from funds that are closed
to outside investors. From a Berk and Green
framework it's very surprising to have a fund that's not accepting
outside money. Because you could
earn more management fees if you let in more capital. Those concerns are
highlighted in our Columns 2 and 3
where we show that actually these funds
that are close to outside investors
do incredibly well. They're earning 2-4 percent every year in additional Alpha. It seems like outside
investors should really want to get
into these funds. The management could
make more money in management fees
that they let them inside the fun, so
why don't they? Well, the resolution that is in Column 1 where we find that these funds close to outsiders actually have
more skin in the game. This is illustrating more starkly the mechanism we think is partly
driving a result, which is that the fund managers are creating separate vehicles. They're keeping their
own money in some funds, optimizing the scale,
optimizing the strategies, and instead offering outside investors
different products, products at a different scale that don't get as much an Alpha. Additional evidence that capacity constraints
can be driving this result come from the size of the funds
that we're looking at. Again, looking within firms, contrasting funds
within the firm that have different amounts
of skin in the game, we find that the high
skin funds are smaller. That's again consistent with a scale interpretation
of this result. Further evidence comes from the role of flow performance. This is just a
regression version of that plot I showed you earlier. What we're finding is that
when funds do better, in terms of excess returns that are inside our funds that as they're managing higher than 20 percent marker
of inside capital, these funds don't accept as much outside capital
the next order. Meaning that the insider
funds have a good quarter, you would ordinarily
expect capitals flowing. We don't see capital flowing as much when there's an insider
fund that's consistent with the idea that the
insider funds are better managing the capacity
of their strategy, not accepting as much
outside capital. We see that on the
extensive margin, taking any capital at all, as well as an intensive
margin question. We've also looked at this in the context of flagship funds. I don't have the result here, but comparing the skin of a flagship fund
in particular firm, does that drive flow to the other funds and the
family and we also find that superior performance
of funds in that context also doesn't drive flows into
other funds in the family. What these results suggest is that it's not a
signaling story. Because if it were
a signaling story, if it were the case that
managers are pledging personal commitments in order to drive
investor interests, we would expect to see
greater flows in the future, either into the fund that they've got the
personal commitments in or maybe into the family overall and we don't see that. That suggests instead that
it seems more likely that it's something like moral hazard that's
driving the result, that there's some
agency conflict between the LPs and GPs and that the managers
are doing something different in the funds
that they operate, either on their scale or the
nature of the strategies. Further evidence for this capacity constraint
interpretation comes from the strategies where we see the
strongest effects. What I'm plotting here
as a coefficient so the basic coefficient
relating inside investment to Alpha across different
fund categories and we see the
strongest relationship between inside investment
and performance and the categories that
we think are more characterized by
capacity constraints. These are relative value
multi-strategy event-driven. We think of these as arbitrage
like strategies that are more capacity constraint
and so we expect to see a greater relationship between inside investment and
performance there. We don't see a strong effects
and CTAs or fund to funds and fund to funds we exclude
for our main analysis. Additional evidence for
this agency interpretation comes from an event study. What happens when a
new fund is created. What we're doing here is
looking at funds that only had one fund to begin with and it's now open
up a second fund. We think what happens
is this offers the fund managers
the opportunity to do one of two things. They can either keep their personal capital commitments in the old fund and use the new one to raise additional revenue. In that case, that's
the case in red. We find that that original fund continues to do very well. Money stays in the old
fund, old fund as well. Contrast that with the
results in teal here. This is what happens when
you create a new fund. You move your capital
to a new fund. Meaning that you
use your old fund for marketing purposes. It's got a track record. Outside investors are
flowing into that, but your own money
travel somewhere else. In that case, we find
that old fund does not do as well after
the new fund creation. Finding that the money follows the skin is additional evidence for agency conflicts in
driving our results. A lot of other people have
worked on this question. What I want to emphasize
is that relative to the mutual fund literature,
which has looked at this, that literature has
really emphasized a signaling interpretation
of the relationship between inside investment
performance and we think we're finding evidence instead of a moral hazard interpretation of
what's going on here. In particular, based on
the evidence from flows. We do a lot of other
stuff in the paper. To conclude, I think what these results help
rationalize is how do we live in a world in which outside investors
don't seem to do very well when they're accessing
delegated fund managers. How is it that hedge fund
managers themselves seem to do extremely well and yet we
have a lot of competition? We're trying to understand these joint dynamics and what
we're suggesting is that that picture ignores
that a major aspect of compensation and the hedge
fund industry actually comes from the capacity of
managers to invest on private capital and
their funds manage these differently from the funds
that they're opening to outside investors and we think this is an
important fact to understand for asset management
generally. Thank you. 