Lawrence Christiano: Made
the parameters of the model. Now, each one of those things is obviously a
complicated situation. You're going to have to provide information to the [inaudible]. The information that's provided is provided in a program. Let's call it prog.mod. The key thing being MOD, MOD is a file with the extension MOD that has in it instructions
about what you want to do. Solve simulator estimate. This file is going to have to have a bunch
of stuff in it. One obvious thing
you're going to need in any case is you're going to
have to provide the model. You have to communicate what
the model to this thing. There's a syntax and
Diane that we'll get to for telling it
what the model is. Then you're going to have
to give it instructions about what to do with a model. You'll have to tell
it; do you want to only solve it and then stop? Do you want to simulate it? Or if you want to simulate it, you're going to have
to tell it exactly in response to what do
you want to simulate it? If you want to estimate
it, of course, then it's going to
go wild in terms of how much information
you need to provide. You need to tell it
where's your data? You know what dataset is it. What's the first observation you're supposed to
use in your dataset? What's the last observation? What you should you remove the trends from the
data first or whatever, all kinds of little details
that you have to tell it. Of course it will do
Bayesian estimation, which means you have to tell
it what your priors are, what are the parameter
values of your product? You have to provide all the
information that you would think that you have to provide. You have to write this
all into this file. Then what [inaudible] does? It's a program that you
execute from inside MATLAB. What Diane does is it
takes the prog file. Whoops, prog.mod. You made up this name here, and it produces a
bunch of MATLAB files. That is M files. [inaudible] is
something you eat, you execute from inside MATLAB. You feed it your MOD file. It eats the MOD file, and then it translates
the MOD file what it ate there into
MATLAB instructions, which are then able to implement whatever it
is that you want to do. That's the basic idea
about [inaudible]. It's a little bit
like, I don't know. Of course nobody here
knows about this. But like FORTRAN for example, FORTRAN has it's own
personal language and you will put it into
a special FORTRAN file. Then FORTRAN would eat
the file and translate it into machine language
and then execute. Then it's like that. Although at a higher level, because if [inaudible] is a higher level even then MATLAB, and MATLAB is already
a pretty simple thing. Let's get more into the
situation here with [inaudible]. We need to locate the files. What that means is that the CGG thing has
very little in, and actually it's a very simple little oh, it looks
like it has nothing. Whatever. I hear people
saying things but. FEMALE_1: [inaudible]. Lawrence Christiano: No. This is supposed to work. But it's also a ZIP file. Anyway, if we look in that
ZIP file, we should find it. FEMALE_1: [inaudible] . Lawrence Christiano:
Gunk, if you do that. But the thing is you guys, you have to take the code out of the ZIP file and copy it into normal space, or
you already did it. Great. Now here we have the program. It's amazingly simple
little job here. What I want to do a talk
a little bit about the, I can't see that either myself. It's like it's nothing there. It talks about the
syntax of this thing. I mean, we could
jump directly to hear this model command has. By the way, these commands, they always have the property, they followed by an end. When the command is over, it's got an end and you have to have semi-colons
after everything. Otherwise it runs. It doesn't recognize blanks. If you don't have a semicolon, it just thinks whatever comes next as part of that
particular command. The first thing is model and
the last thing here is n, and then you type in your model. Not surprisingly, this has
already been linearized. Normally you would write it in the non-linear equations and it would linearize it for you. Now we're writing in the linear equations and we're also giving a little bit of an assist by telling them that
they're linear. Of course, if you didn't
tell him it was linear, it would just linearize it and then they would
still be linear. You're just saving
it a little bit of the electrons that have less running around to do
if you type in linear here. As I say, I'm pretty sure that he Jesus will have
an example with RBC model and then you'll have the nonlinear equations
in there too. Also, by the way,
my website is just littered with these types of ZIP files with all kinds of examples including
RBC and stuff like that. Anyway, here's the
pricing equation. Now notice that when you
look at these equations, you start to see there's
different types of variables. There are really three types of variables and I don't know, but there's two really
fundamentally distinct variables. One is like a constant and
the other one is a time series variable. Thank you. Yeah, that's great. Thank you. One is a constant, and so if we look at this Beta, of course, this ain't no
time series variable. This is a constant here. But the Pie guy is a
time series variable. Now, in order for it to know
this, Pie is inflation, of course, you have to declare
this stuff in advance. Let's go back and see how
those declarations are made. If we go to the first line here, where I've got two
slashes there, that's a comment so dynamic
totally ignores that line. The line here says var and in the var command is where you declare what are your
time series variables. There's a variable called da. Da is the change in a, and then there's inflation and there's r the
net interest rate, then there's a net
natural interest rate. There's Tau, which is
the backache thing, preference shock and
the utility function, u is a monetary policy shock, and x is the output gap in here. Here are the parameters. Parameters are constants,
Phi, Beta, Kappa. This is the coefficient
on x and the policy rule. This is all the same notation
that I had in the handout. Phi, Pi is the
weight on inflation, Alpha is the smoothing
parameter and the policy rule, Rho is the
autoregressive parameter of the technology growth rate, and Lambda is the coefficient on back pain and Delta is the autoregressive
coefficient on the monetary policy shock. These are all parameters. You don't actually have to put all the parameters into
the perimeter statement. But if there are any parameters, what dynamic does is, just to repeat this thing here. It takes, what is it
I called it prog.mod, and then it will
eat these things and it will produce
various M files. One of them is called prog.m. By the way, you'd never
even have to know or think or be aware
of these things. But one of these things
is called prog.m. That's the main MATLAB program. These other two programs
here one is the statement of the model equations, the actual dynamic equations, and some format that dynamic
understands internally, always in MATLAB though. The other one is the
steady-state equations, which is the same as this, but no time
subscripts over here. You may want to
communicate inside here. Parameters that are living in the main program into here, and you use the parameter
statement for that. If there is a parameter
that only lives in here and does not need to be communicated down into
any of these subprograms, you don't have to include it
in the parameter statement. However, is the rule, you
might as well just put in all parameters into the
parameter statement, you never go wrong with that. Put in all constant terms here. Put it all constant terms, just stick them here. These are the deep parameter. I'm going to get rid
of more deep there, that's not too good. The times these
variables are here, and the parameters are here. Now there's a third type of
variable called var XOs. The var XOs are the exogenous
shocks in the model. By exogenous shock,
what I mean is the impulse to the
exogenous shocks. The actual shock
itself, like you, which is the monetary
policy shock tower, which is the backache shot, this shot and the DA, which is the technology shock. These are actually variables. They're treated as endogenous
variables in the model, and the exogenous variable
is the impulse to that thing so that impulse in the monetary policy shock
is called Epsilon u, Epsilon a, Epsilon Tau. These are the three types
of variables which it can then use to interpret what's
going on if you go down, we're in the model statement. If we look inside
this model thing, you can see in this
first equation here, you've got Beta, and
then you've got a Pi, and then notice I got a plus 1. What plus 1 means, if there were nothing there, because dynamic now knows
that this is a var, Pi is a var, it's up
in the var command. If there's nothing there, then dynamic interprets that as a T. If there's a plus j in there, then dynamic interprets
that as a t plus j. Here, notice x is a variable,
but it has nothing in it, so that's xt and Pi is a
variable, nothing in it, so that's Pi t. Also in terms
of expectation operators, dynamic assumes
that you have an ET in both sides of the equality, you have an ET on both sides. In the case of
non-linear equations, you actually want to
think carefully about that because dynamic
is also assuming that. You would never want to
write an equation like here. Let's look at this for example. Here's a first-order condition. Beta times u prime
C_t plus 1 times R_t. This defines the real interest
rate r in, oh sorry, E_t. But where R_t is
known at time t, this is a state non-contingent
interest rate from t to t plus 1 that defines
this thing here. You could be tempted to write down an
equation like this. You might be tempted
in Dynare to write down R equals
this, of course, leaving out the E_t
and then you'll be making a big mistake because Dynare runs right
through the whole thing. This is the right
way to write it. You would write it this way. If you drop the E_t operator, then Dynare will implement this. You have to think a
little bit about how you write the
equations out to take into account the fact that dynamic is doing the E_t
operator in this way. Now, everything is linear here, so this is not the
best framework in which to emphasize this. You'll see this when [inaudible] talks about
this stuff tomorrow. Here's the temporal equation. This is the real interest
rate and that of the natural rate of interest. This is tomorrow's gap. This is today's
gap. This should be a faithful and exact
reproduction of the equations that we
had in the handout. Here we have the
monetary policy rule. Here you have Rho r
star is equal to Rho a. Another way to write this would be simply this way. Forget the Rho a stuff. That's actually the same thing. That's literally the same
thing, what I just wrote, because E_t of dot t plus 1, given the way d_a is defined
in the next equation, is the same as Rho times d_a. You could run it both
ways and see if you get exactly the same results. Actually, this is
intuitively a little bit more because the R star is the prospective growth rate in consumption in the
natural equilibrium, and if we were ignoring
the Tau for a second, that expected growth rate
exactly coincides with the expected growth
rate of a itself. We can write it the other way, it doesn't make any difference. That's the natural
rate of interest. This is the law of
motion of that. There we go, that's
the whole thing. Now I've defined the model. I assign values to
the parameters. Anyway, Beta is 0.99, and that annual quarterly. Phi x is 0, no
weight on the gap. Phi Pi is 1.5. No smoothing parameter, and so this is the exact
example that we just did. Now, the other thing you
have to do is you have to assign values to
the var XO guys. Var XO guys are treated different animals
from parameters. They have their own
personal type of syntax, and so you have
to put in shocks. This is an announcement
that you're about to declare what the variance
of Epsilon a is, and then actually I'm declaring the standard deviation instead. I'm setting the standard
deviation to 1, which is a ridiculous number because that's 100
percent shock. These are all in logs,
so 1 means 100 percent. But a more sensible
number will be 0.01, but I multiply this
by 100 so that the output can be thought of as having all been
multiplied by 100. Everything's in percent terms. But then, in the end,
I'm not going to pay attention to any of
those things anyway. All these guys are set to 1. So far, all we've done is we
haven't told it what to do. Basically, we've given it the model with the
model command, and then backing up from there, we've differentiated
which of the elements in the model are parameters,
which are var XOs, which are endogenous variables, and what are parameters, and then we've set
the parameters, we set the var XO, so now we're ready to go someplace to do something
with this thing. The only thing that we're
going to do here is to just simulate this model. What I've got is I've got the stochastic simulate command, which does the simulation, and I've got a couple
of things in there. One, as I told it, no graphs. It produces all graphs, but they're not as beautiful
as the graphs that you could write yourself, which we'll have
right after here. I always type in no graph, and then I got IRF equals
7 means that it's going to hit each variable with one
standard deviation shock, which I set to be 1, and then it's going to supply
seven dynamic responses. Now, there's a big question. Where do you find
those responses? The answer is that the place where you
find the responses, what it does is it's
going to compute the responses of all the
variables in the var command. Suppose you had var, and one of the variables is x, which in fact it is. Then the place where you find the responses is you go to x. This will be in memory
after you execute this. You can think of
this as being x. You could actually forget
that this is a modifier. You can think of this
as being a MATLAB file, and then everything
goes sequential, and then you're thinking
about it the right way. The place where you're going
to find this x thing is, this is the notation, you take the name of the variable as it appears
in the var command, put an underline next to it, and then you write in the name of the shock that you want
to get the response to. The names here are say, Epsilon a, e p s underlying a. This of course you make up. This is also an
underlying. This you make up, but that
you don't make up. That underlying there
signifies that you want the response of this endogenous
variable to this var, from this var XO thing. Those are in memory available for you to access afterward. In particular, the way
I've written this thing, I've just started typing
in MATLAB commands here. I want to see what
is the level of a? Well, these are
growth rates of a, so to get the level of a, you had to calculate the
cumulative sum of the a's. This is just straight
MATLAB here. This regular MATLAB, you
can just type it right in. Think about the mod file
as a sequential thing with some slightly
weird language that you're not used to
like model and end, but then interspersed
with MATLAB commands. These commands will
see the prog.m. When this thing
writes this m file, you will find this code will be reproduced exactly
in this form, although you really have to have semi-colons after
everything or it will get totally screwed up because if you don't have
the semicolon after figure, it will run into subplot, and that's not a MATLAB command, is not any command at all. You have to have semi-colons. Well, actually, I
don't have a semicolon here, so I lied about that. This is the whole thing. MALE_1: [inaudible]. Lawrence Christiano: What? MALE_1: [inaudible] Lawrence Christiano: I
know. Now, I'm confused. If we look inside this thing, you can see what I'm doing here. Here, I'm plotting
the cumulative sum of the response of
Delta Epsilon a, and then there's
a title here that says level of technology
because I'm taking the cumulative sum
of the changes in a, which translates
into the level of a. Here's inflation, and so
you get a graph of that. Here you have the actual
nominal interest rate. Here you have the natural
rate of interest. There's also hours worked here. Can anyone tell why this is
a slightly weird thing here? What do you suppose
the value of that is? How does Tau respond
to a technology shock? Well, it doesn't because Tau is an exogenous process
it responds only. That's nice to have it there, but that had better
have just zeros in it. Notice what I've got
here is I've got that the hours worked is equal to x. Does that make sense? If you look inside the
model that we just derived, if you look inside there, you don't see any hours worked. How would we get hours
worked out of the solution? Well, I'm saying, let's
look at the response of x. Why is that? If we look at the output gap, we have x_t is equal
to y_t minus y_t star. That's the output gap. Let's suppose in
response to a_t. Y_t, actual output, is equal to a_t plus n_t. An efficient output is
equal to a_t plus nothing. In response to a, what x is, is the response of n. That's how you read
the response of n, and so that's why in that
graph there, I've got that. What else we got going on here? Pi, r, r star, x, this is hours worked. Here's the actual output. But this is a little bit
trickier actual output because the y star is a, but we don't have
a in the model. We have d_a, we don't have a. In order to recover
actual output, what we have is x is y minus a, so I have to add
a to it to get y. That's what we got here.
Taking the output gap and add the level of a to
the output gap to get the level of actual output. This irregular MATLAB commands, and so there they are. Let's run this thing
and see what happens. We go over here. Make sure you're in
the right place, and there it is. Actually, it's better to
have this thing over there. Let's just rewrite this
so we can compare the actual and the natural
rate of interest. R_o this is extremely painful. T_t equals 1 to length, r underlying EPS, underline a, and then let's graph
the nominal rate and the natural rate, and we get this nominal rate. Actual nominal rate and natural rate. We go like this. MALE_2: [inaudible]. Lawrence Christiano:
Well, this is where the eating occurs. You type Dynare space, you put the name of the file, Dynare assumes that you have a.MOD at the end of that thing. It's not going to eat
that and it translate it into a MATLAB code. Well, let's look at the MATLAB, although you don't actually have to look at the MATLAB code, but you might just feel
really like you want to, so we'll do that. But to run this thing, I
just type Dynare space CGG, and then it just does a
bunch of stuff. It runs it. The last instructions in
there where this thing here, but we can look at
some of the other stuff that had generated. Well, here's giving
out information. It's wonderful,
actually read it. This is Michelle [inaudible] has played a large role. As you can tell from the
name, he's a French guy. If you look inside Dynare, by the way, Dynare
is written almost entirely in MATLAB itself. There is a core part that no one is allowed to
touch its secret, a stealth part, which is an executable file which
you can't get into to see. But most of it is
written in MATLAB, and it's got all notes written by Michelle
to himself in there. Half of them are in French, half of them are in English and some words are half English
and French all at once. We're not doing any
econometric thing in here but if you look at the
econometric output, there's something called
an acceptance rate. I don't know, probably everybody here is familiar
with Bayesian stuff. But anyway, you do MCMC algorithm there's
something called an acceptance rate and
in his printout, it's the acceptanceone rate and it's been that way
since the beginning. Anyway, he has all
these little things. He just did his generalized
QCD composition. He's just doing all these,
giving you a little message. He also gets very excited
sometimes because he's like, we don't
see that here, but you'll see
exclamation points, I'm working on this, done. All messages come to
you as it's executing. Look, processing, we didn't
see that because it went too fast, but anyway, whatever. That's just a bunch
of information. Then he's got the
number of things in the seven variables, three shocks, those of our XOs. What we call shocks
actually aren't shocks. Money demand thing is that the A is not a shock or
DA is not a shock, the XOs are shocked. Then he's got jumpers,
people jumping off of buildings and things,
it's wonderful here. Then you get some
information on stuff. It's calculating the
variance covariance matrix of the shocks, and here what you
have is the solution. That thing there
is the solution. Remember, I defined before a solution has a matrix A and B. You have this zt equals
a times zt minus 1. The zt guys are up here. They're the columns da Pi, r and so on. Then the state on to which
it feeds back is the rows. Now, Dynare is very efficient. The algorithm that I described this morning when I was
quickly going through what a linearization
algorithm does. I made the state the
whole of the past zt. That's very inefficient. If employment is a
current variable, having lagged employment
as a state variable, it's not efficient
at all because it's in fact not a state variable. But Dynare is
extremely efficient and correctly
calculates the state. The number of rows is typically, I don't know what it is
in this case is less than the number of columns. But you can see here, look, in the case of dev you know what the correct
policy rule is. Dev 0.2 times Dev minus 1
plus 1 times the innovation. If it's not that then you
know it made a mistake. The other thing, you
don't really know, that's what the
solution is done. You look at inflation, inflation is a function
of Lambda by that 0.007, lag, tau, all these thing. That's the policy rule, that's the actual solution. That matrix that's called GHX is hiding deep inside the
memory structure of Dynare, it's something that
can be recovered. Every calculation that Dynare does can be recovered
somewhere in its memory. It's very pretty
efficiently organized. You can actually find stuff, although not totally and they don't really have a
serious manual for that. There is a manual, but it's
not super, super good. Some hunting and pecking has
to be done to find stuff. But every calculation, everything you ever do in Dynare is available someplace
in memory for later use. We're not doing
enough right now to really impress you with that because we're
only doing a solution. I can tell you you
can find that GHX. But if you're starting
to do some weird, you're starting to do Bayesian business and you're operating, your applying the
smoother and all stuff, all the smooth variables, everything is planted somewhere
and available for use. It's very good in that way. It's not great in the manual. I don't know why
they haven't put more emphasis on
that. It's okay. It has an okay manual,
but it's not great. Here is the output gap. How does it depend? But notice here,
this is a shock. That's what we would
call an exogenous shock, and it only depends on its
own lag and its own shock. That's exactly the
way it appears, and that's the way it has to be. Here we have, it's
calculating the second mean and standard deviation and variance of the
variables in the VAR. A command, and then we have a variance decomposition
that's being reported. There's a bunch of
information that's reported on the thing that's what
this output is about, and some correlations and
stuff like that and so on. I think it might be good idea to focus on, I don't
know why for sure, but is this stuff here. I thought what we
could do is just play around with this
stuff a little bit, and in the process do
some economics and in the process also get used
to working with Dynare. The first thing we see here, we just reproduce
what's in the slides. Actually, you can reproduce exactly  what's in the slides. The actual graph that I used
is also available here. I think you will have
noticed that in the zip file there's a program called plots, and so that's the one that actually
produced this stuff. All these little diagram. But we don't need this fancy,
this gorgeous graphics. What I'd like to do is I'd like to go through this,
the list of things, and in the process
what you're going to discover is how easy it
is to change a model, for example, we're going
to change the model, make some tweaks
to the model, run the model again, and
see what happens. The first thing I
suggest that we do is look at the sensitivity of the model to a change in the time series
representation of A. If we look at A here, the model of A that we have
right now is this one here. With this model, what happens
is when there's a shock, put time over here, put AT over here. If there's a unit shock to epsilon that moves
up A by one unit, and then A keeps on rolling in the same direction because it's autocorrelated in the
first differences, and it asymptotes to 1/1 minus rho because
it jumps by one, then rho and rho squared, add them all up, you
get 1/1 minus rho. That's the eventual
impact of a shock to a level of A under that
time series representation. That's basically the whole story about the dynamic response. That's why you get this surge in demand is that if people see that their perspective
situation is much better than the
current situation, and that triggers
this big increase in demand that exceeds even
the rise in A itself. You see the efficient thing
is for demand to rise by exactly the rise in A, no more, no less, so that employment
doesn't respond. That's the efficient
thing in this economy. But what happens here is, at some level the increase in demand is this
whole amount here. If you kept the
interest rate constant, they would just want to go to their new permanently
sustainable level. It will be epsilon
less but not much. They would want to
go all the way up to this thing and the rise in the interest rate is designed
to get them to do this. But the problem is
that the Taylor rule, being too weak doesn't raise
the interest rate enough, so they actually increase
their consumption by more. Now let's try and
change the story, and let's put this in here. We have T, we have AT, instead of this,
let's make it this. Now, we've fundamentally changed the time series
representation of a, because now when there's a
shock to a you're actually better off today than you
will be in the future. Triggers exactly
the opposite type of reactions to people, and let's see what happens. We're going to have to change
the program to do that. In the old days, when
you had to program this stuff up yourself,
this would be a nightmare. You take in a whole afternoon, you've be making 16 mistakes, now we'll only make
one or two mistakes and we'll do it
in a few minutes. Let's see. How do we do this? It's always true that our star has to be the
expected growth rate of a. That's always true.
It's always true that the efficient level of
consumption is proportional to a. That's another weird
thing about this m odel. The time series properties of a have nothing to do with what the efficient response
and consumption is to a. It's always see rising
at the same rate, and employment is never
supposed to respond. For example, if you get news at tomorrow is going
to be a lot higher, you're supposed to work
the same level today. Employment is always constant, and so C has to be going
with a all the time. There's all things
we could do here, but here I'll propose the most
confusing possible thing. Let's just interpret Da as a, just to make sure that
we all get confused. Da was Delta a. Now it's a. What I want in here
is plus 1 minus Da, or equivalently, could
be Rho minus 1 times Da. Da has to be interpreted as a. Actually that's the only
change we have to make. We don't have to change
this equation because we just interpreted that as a. That should be the whole
ballgame. But notice what we've done is
we've changed the sign. We change the sign on
the response to a shock, and in this variable here, from positive to negative, because Rho is a
negative number, which is exactly what
we think should happen. That with a shock like the
one on the bottom there, the natural rate of
interests has to drop, because the problem is that people don't want to consume in response
to this shock. There's going to be an
inadequacy of aggregate demand. Actually, this shock
is the represent. Most people if you go and talk to somebody
on the street, you just go outside front
door here and you say, if there's a technological
improvement, for example, we figured out
some way that two people can bake 100 loaves a day
as opposed to three people. Most people would say, what would happen to employment? What would a normal person
say if you tell them, "Look it used to be where
the old technology, you needed three
people per oven. I got a whole new fancy oven. I only need two
people per oven." What happens to employment? Down. That's what the
normal person think. No, you guys never met
a normal person maybe. Normal people think that when there's a technological
improvement, that's labor saving,
you fire the bastards. Then when you tell them,
hey, there've been a lot of technical improvements
since 1750, and all I see is
a lot more people working and then they
get all confused. They say that's history. I don't know what
you're talking about. There's a way of translating
it into economics with a technology shock
and improvement shock, normal person thinks
that demand does not surge enough in
response to that to soak up all the extra output that's necessary in order to
keep employment unchanged. This model of a is
going to rationalize that view together with the excessive weakness
of the Taylor rule. Let's give it a shot here. Now we got to change this
figure a little bit. I don't know how we do this. We get one way we could do this. To get A, you don't need
the cum sum of A anymore. You just need D_a. D_a is now the level, so there's the level
of technology. Then there were some
other place where we had this happening. Where is it? Here. What is this? Here's another place
where we had to take the cumulative sum because Da was being interpreted
as the change in a, but now it's the level
of a, so there we go. This should work and
give us what happens. No mistakes. Let's
see what happens now. If you look a t the
natural rate of interest, as expected that the natural rate of interests goes down. Why? Because there's
inadequate aggregate demand. Nobody wants to spend. Why don't they want to spend?
Well, because they want to save and they want
to not spend today, so they can spend more
tomorrow or something, because they're
temporarily high. The natural rate
of interest drops. What happens with
the Taylor rule? Too weak. You see that, it's not
cutting interest rate enough. What we have is we have
inadequate aggregate demand. Now when I was a youngster, I was pointing
this out at lunch. If anybody in the old days, like when I was your age, said the word inadequate
aggregate demand. They were automatically
recognized as a retarded human being. If all you had to do was say, I think there's inadequate
algorithm, you're retarded. But this model really and truly has in it the concept of
inadequate aggregate demand, because in this simulation, there's something
in the environment that makes people
not want to spend. The efficient thing is to
get the interest rate down, so that they actually do that. The efficient thing is what's
in the Ramsey equilibrium. How do we know what's efficient? Because it is. We computed the optimum. The optimum is the best. That's the Ramsey, but the Taylor rule doesn't
move it enough, and so you're not getting enough stimulus
to aggregate demand. As a consequence, look what
happens to hours worked. It drops by 7/10 of a
percent and output, so it's not supposed to
drop it all, but it does, so that's regrettable thing, that fallen hours
worked it's bad. It's a bad thing. That's bad. The output is rising, but it's not rising
enough because look, it's incredibly how
tragic this is. Output should be
rising by one percent, and it arises only by
a 1/4 of a percent. There's actually addition
works here a little bit. You can see hours
worked is going by 3/4 of percent going down, and outputs going
up by 0.75 percent. You add the two
things up, and it's the one that it's
supposed to be. That's the beauty
of simple examples. See this thing here should be in the efficient equilibrium
goes all the way up to one. Look what's happening
to inflation here, because there's no demand, the firms aren't hiring anybody. Because they're not
hiring anybody, the wage is going down. Because the wage is going down, marginal costs are lower
and inflation is dropping. You can see here with a New Keynesian Model, for example, the fundamental nature of the response of inflation
of hours worked to a technology shock depends on what type of
technology shock is it. Is it the one on the
top of the picture, or is it the one on the
bottom of the picture? By the way, if I had
to put my bets on what technology actually isn't a real United States of America, I would say it's the
thing on the top. Technology isn't the nature of you invent something
and then you forget it, which is what the
bottom is all about. I figured out how to make
10 loaves of bread with only one person, and then three weeks later shit. I knew how to do it
before, but now I forgot. That's not the way it works. I would say that from
that perspective, that in the context of
the New Keynesian model, that technology shocks make inflation take off and
they make hours worked. Let's go here to look at
some of these things, so a little
coordination, strategy. What I'm going to
do is let's just continue with this
until the break, and then after the break we'll go on to the
financial frictions. This to a couple of
more things here. Let me see if I can pick one. Why don't we just
do the first two? We already did the fourth one and then we won't
do the bottom one. But you can easily do it. You could just say
put in a shock, it tells you that in the
future A is going to go up and then see how things respond. By the way, if you do that, what happens is it's
really quite amazing. You put in a future
shock in here. It makes marginal cost
go down in the future. These guys start cutting
their prices today. But what does the
Taylor rule do when you start cutting
your prices today? It cuts the interest rate. What are you supposed to do? When things look
nice in the future, you're supposed to raise
the interest rate, so it's going exactly
the wrong direction. There's some sense in which
that may actually have something to do with
historical data. In the United States of America and in many other countries, what you observe is in
the United States over the last 200 years in every single stock
market boom that has occurred in the
United States since 1807, inflation has been
low during that boom. There is some idea that booms are associated
with low inflation, and so if you're a serious
inflation target or guy, then you're likely to respond by rolling fuel on that fire. If you think there's
a boom underway which is a bubble or something, then because it's likely
to have low inflation, after all every boom
in the United States, some of them must
have been bubbles, has low inflation,
you might think that. By the way, here's an entry. The poster child for
this idea is Japan. If you look at the
Japanese data, there's of course a famous boom, a stock market
boom, in the '80s. The astonishing thing about the stock market
boom in the '80s, I love it when I can draw
data with my own hand because it's awkward when you have to draw
the actual data, doesn't always confirm with the story you're trying to tell. If you put time here and then you have the
stock market boom. This would be 1980 something and you have the boom
and then you have 1990, something like that,
this is stock market. Then if you do the log
of the price level, what's interesting about Japan is the log of the price level is rising at a decent clip
up to the time of the boom, and then the minute
the boom gets cooking, the price level flattens out. Indeed, the first
modern deflations that you see in Japan
are in this period. They erupted the paint inside the Bank of Japan at this time. On the one hand, you
had the people who are following the Taylor rule, which means you pay
attention to inflation. There were saying we going
to cut the interest rate. Then you had other
people who said look, we've got this crazy stock
market boom underway, we got to raise
the interest rate. Well, it turns out that
the people who said you got to cut the interest
rate won the debate, and if you look at
the policy instrument of the Bank of Japan
during this period, the rate is plunging, the nominal interest rate is
plunging during this time. In fact, it's plunging not too far from what a Taylor rule
would have told you to do. Not quite as much actually, Taylor Rule would have
told you to do more. They didn't do it
that much. This is another example of how a
stock market boom seems to be often associated
with low inflation and this model gives you an
interpretation of that, anyway. Whatever. We took care
of this last one. Now, we just have working cap. The first two. Let me talk for a
second here and this is important partly for getting
into the dinar situation. I want to talk about the
Taylor principle for a minute. The Taylor principle is that you set Alpha
Pi bigger than one. By the way, I'm going to
need Alpha x equal to zero otherwise the details of the principal will
change a little bit. With Alpha x equal to zero, then Alpha Pi bigger than
one is somehow a nice thing. That is if Alpha Pi
is less than one, you have the potential for
self-fulfilling fluctuations, a potential for a form of instability that may
not be present at all, and it's very trivial
the intuition. I might as well
just do that here. I can draw the model. It's basically IS-LM model,
I'm going to do that. We have an IS curve here. Here is output, that's the nominal
interest rate. But because this guy here is a function of the
real interest rate, I'm going to need to have
expected inflation here. Then we have Mr. LM over there. Then I'm going to have over here y and I'm going to have, this will be the Phillips curve and this is the
actual inflation. You might have some,
I don't know what, you're in a situation
that looks like that. What I mean by Alpha Pi
being bigger than one, what that means is that the monetary authority actually controls the location
of that LM curve. What the Taylor
rule means is that they commit to moving
the interest rate around that is to say moving the LM
curve around in such a way that the interest
rate implied by the Taylor rule is satisfied. Let's suppose that this Pi
E goes up by some amount. The vertical shift, so people expect
higher inflation. Let's not ask why,
they're idiots. They saw a movie about Argentina and they say oh, Argentina, they speak Spanish in Argentina, they speak Spanish in New York, must be we're going to get
inflation in New York. The expected inflation
goes up by Delta Pi E, so this thing shifts up. This vertical distance
is exactly delta Pi E because with this
rise in the interest rate, the desired spending
by people is unaffected because I'm
assuming the IS curve, the people who are
doing the spending in here are looking only at
the real interest rate. What Alpha Pi bigger
than one means is that these guys
commit to shifting this LM curve back by more
than this vertical distance. Let's see what happens
if they do that. We start off from
this situation here. They raise the nominal
interest rate by more than the rise in
expected inflation. What does that do to
the real interest rate that makes it come down? What happens when the
real interest rate is coming down in the model, probably not in the data, is it spending goes down. What we end up
with is over here. But what is happening
to actual inflation? It's coming down. The high real interest
rate cut into demand, but demand drives
output in the model, so output and employment go down, wages go
down and blah, blah, blah, and then actual
inflation rate goes down for the reasons we've already gone through in our simulations. Now, remember this was all triggered by people
expecting higher inflation. Their expectations of higher
inflation lead them to anticipate higher inflation
was going to occur, but it actually caused
lower inflation to occur. What would happen to those
crazy nuts who came out of the movie theater
thinking there'll be higher inflation when
they see lower inflation? Well, they'll stop
expecting higher inflation. Except the real lunatics who are completely committed to
believing in higher inflation, but they will be
ignored by people. I'm giving you a
learning interpretation of the Taylor principle. In rational expectations, this can't happen
in the first place. No one would have this crazy expectation because
they know it would only lead to the opposite
from happening. In a learning environment, people could have this crazy expectation but it would then be extinguished by what
happens afterwards. This spontaneous increase in expectations that has
nothing to do with anything would not occur, or if it did occur, it could only survive
a brief moment. In a rational expectations
model, that can happen, in a learning model it can happen but for
a brief moment. Now, let's suppose that Alpha Pi is less than one. If Alpha Pi is less than 1, that means that when people
expect higher inflation, they commit to raising the interest rate
because it's positive, but they raise the interest rate by less than this distance. The LM curve ends up
over here somewhere, you end up with higher
output and higher inflation. It could be that people started expecting inflation
because they went to see a crazy movie
and they got drunk afterwards and they
had a stupid idea, but their expectations of higher inflation actually lead to actual higher inflation, in which case the origins
of the belief become irrelevant because it's actually got a higher inflation now. This is an equilibrium. It's an equilibrium in
a learning environment, it's also a rational
expectations equilibrium. In particular, we would expect based on this logic
that Alpha Pi, so the Taylor rule logic or the Taylor
principle logic says, make sure your Alpha
Pi is bigger than one. Because if it's less than one, you are going to create
instability in the economy. You will make the economy
vulnerable to instability. These are fluctuations that have nothing to do with anything but people's expectations
and are generally speaking not efficient
in models, not always. You construct models where those things would be efficient, but generally speaking, those
things are inefficient. The case Alpha Pi
less than one in technical terms is a case where there's
multiple equilibria. The case Alpha Pi bigger than one is the case where
there's one equilibrium. We've already done Alpha
Pi bigger than one. Let's try Alpha Pi less than one and see what
happens in dinar. We can actually check the details of the logic here by making it just
a teeny weeny bit. No, I know. Let's start
out with this Pi. I'm calling an Alpha Pi
but it's [inaudible] pi. Let's make this equal to 1.0001. The logic here would say we shouldn't notice
any difference. Boom, everything worked fine. No problem. Thank you. Okay. Now let's put it in 0.999. Let's go on the
opposite side of one. Long shard cone conditions
are not satisfied. Indeterminacy.
Indeterminacy is as a word for multiple equilibria. I'm sure many of
you know there are many concepts of
multiplicity of equilibria and indeterminacy is one type of multiplicity and we have that
consistent with this view. Some people actually went
on to argue, in fact, the guys, [inaudible]
, went on to argue that this is the explanation for the high-inflation
of the '70s. They went and
estimated Alpha Pi. They find that it
was less than one in the '70s and then they said huh, the high inflation in the '70s is what this theory predicts. By the way, did anybody see
a flaw in what I just said? What does output look like
during this high-inflation? What does it look like?
Is it green, pink? What does it look like?
I know you know it. What does that question
like that mean? What does the output look like? Is it getting
stronger or weaker? MALE_3: Weaker. Lawrence Christiano: Yes,
but what about in the model? Stronger. This is called a cross equation
and restrictions. Even with multiplicity
of equilibria, you have cross
variable restrictions. This thing predicts
that there should have been a boom in the '70s. But in fact the '70s was
the opposite of a boom and so there's got to be something wrong
with this exact story, at least it's a story
about the '70s. Actually, I wrote a
separate paper about this. I dickered around with
the model a little bit and I got it to work
as a different model. But anyway, this is discussed at great length as another paper that as far
as it can help, no one has ever read that paper. I've never met anybody
who read this paper. Now there are even more
people who have never read the paper
than this morning. Alright, so that's that. Now, let's suppose we change
the model one more time. I lost my pen. I think that the crisis makes us really think
about this modification. One of the things
you discover in 2008 was how much people
borrow on short-term. You never knew that. They
borrow like for four days, they borrow for like 20 minutes. Actually not 20, I
made that one up. But they borrow for four days, seven days, 14 days; really
short-term borrowing. If they can't have it you hear gurgling sounds coming from the firms suggesting that it's like oxygen to them;
borrowing short-term. That firms have a
mismatch between the times when money comes in and the time that
money goes out. Like a university for example, it gets money four
times a year from tuition and it's got to pay money out to people
all the time. It has a mismatch in terms
of its inflows and outflows. Northwestern uses short-term
commercial paper markets to bridge those things. Let's just suppose for the
heck of it that the firms borrow the whole of
their inputs in markets. The whole wage bill gets
borrowed and in which case, the interest rate becomes a cost of doing business just like the wages but now
the interest rate is. We have to then modify our
little picture here IS, LM. This thing. In particular, this thing here. I'll put now and the
inflation is going to be shifted around for a
given level of output. The way this thing is
set up right now is that higher output implies
higher inflation. Why? Because higher
output means you have to hire more people and they
have to pay more wages. That goes into the
price setting thing. That's what the
positive slope here is. But we can shift the
whole curve up and down if we move
the interest rate. We think about the interest rate as being a shifter here. Now let's make Alpha
Pi bigger than one. Now we put in Pi e. Now let's go through
the same routine here. There's a rise in expected
inflation so this thing here shifts up by the change
in expected inflation. Alpha Pi bigger than one means that they commit to shifting this thing out more and
which creates a recession. If this curve here didn't change then we would get lower inflation and
blah blah blah. But suppose that
the curve shifts, and it shifts a lot. Then the higher
interest rate actually creates the higher inflation that they were afraid about. It's exactly the situation
where you arrive at your house in the evening
it's burning, and you panic. Oh, my God, my house is burning down. All my family photographs, everything is being burned. You run and get a pale you
pour it full of liquidity, and then you throw it in the air and you realize,
what is that smell? Oh, my God, that's gasoline
I put in the bucket. That's what the high
interest rate does if the working capital channel
is sufficiently strong. Let's see how that
works in this model. How would we stick in that
working capital channel? Just add the interest rate. Let's keep this to be a nice, healthy 1.5 and let's
see what happens. We run this thing.
Indeterminacy. We now have exactly what that intuition suggests, which is that you have
multiplicity of equilibria. The Taylor rule, in particular, the Taylor principle, if this working capital channel
is sufficiently strong, then this Taylor principle
actually is a bad idea. In fact, by the
way, normal people think this a lot. I don't know. Again, apparently, you guys
don't know normal people, well, for example, I remember, I was working at the
Minneapolis Fed a long time ago and the president at
that time was Gary Stern, and he was telling the
board of directors, inflation is high, I'm going to go to Washington and raise the interest rate. Once the Federal Reserve presidents arrive in Washington, they're all very meek
and they always bowing to his lordship, the chairman. But when they're back home,
they're all la da da. I'm going to go to
Washington and I'm going to tell them to
raise the interest rate. Anyway, we had all kinds
of people on the board. He was talking to members
of the board and the bank. There was one guy, he had a very thick
neck and thick finger. You couldn't even tell where
his head and his body, they kind of fused. He made concrete that was
his job because he said, look, Mr. Stern, I know you have a PhD from
a very fancy university, and none of your sentences
has words in it. They're less than three
syllables in them. Most of them I don't understand, I have to talk to people who they're educated to tell me what the heck
you're talking about. But I did hear you say
that you're going to raise interest rates
in rid of inflation. I remember him saying this. What he says, I want to
tell you, Mr. Stern, and he raised his hand,
you can hardly see the fingers, because
they were so fat. They're like mine, mine are very fat fingers,
but his were fatter, so it looked almost
like a duck's thing. He said, look, when you
raise the interest rate, I don't know about all your
fancy theories and stuff, but I'm raising my prices. I'm raising my prices because interest rates are
a huge cost of my business and so you
can do whatever you say, whatever you like, but that's
what's going to happen. By the way, a lot of
people thought this way in early '70s. In Washington, we had one
guy called Wright Patman, who was a very
charismatic chairman of the House Banking Committee and who had a lot of power. We shouldn't go into all
the details of that, but he had power over some
critical legislation and he, in those early days,
people talked about raising interest rates
to get rid of inflation. That was discussed
in Washington. He made it very clear
to Arthur Burns at that time, who
was the chairman. He had a southern accent, very charismatic, a
powerful character. He said, Mr. Burns, you have
all your fancy theories, I know you had
something to do with Harvard and all kinds
of other places. But I want to tell
you something, you raise those interest rates and that's going to
make inflation worse and what Wright Patman said was, I'm going to stop
you from raising interest rates because
I am Wright Patman. I am in charge of the House Banking Committee
and I happened to be on the committee
that's writing the wage and price
control legislation, and if you dare to raise
the interest rates, I will take that interest
rate and put it into the wage and price control board and it will be decided there. You will not have control over the interest rate anymore, which is one of the
most astounding events, I think in US monetary history, that one stroke of a pen and the interest rate control
would have been taken entirely outside of the Fed. Very, amazingly, lack
of independence, at least in those early days. This idea of a working capital channel
is kind of a thing. I should add something about this working capital channel. In this model, it's
actually not strong enough. We just put in the R and created indeterminacy but that
was a little bit unfair. If you were serious
and you go into the model and you figure out exactly where does it belong, it's going to belong more
like in Kappa times. It's going to have a
Kappa multiplying it. In that case, you will not get this problem with
the Taylor principle. Do you understand
what I'm saying? In this model, f you put in a working
capital channel, you make it really strong. Here, I just put it in
a reduced form way, I just went boom
and I put it in. If you put it in as
strong as you possibly can in a serious
way, in the model, you will find that
it's not sufficiently strong to create this
indeterminacy problem. However, it's my opinion
that in this model, there's too little
borrowing going on. This is a weird model. This standard model is weird in many ways, but in one way, it's weird because gross output and actual output
are the same thing. In this model, all production is headed towards the
final consumption. The intermediate good
producers are sending it up to the final good producers who are then sending it up to things. A more realistic version
of this model is something that Susanto Basu
has written about, where intermediate
good producers are producing half of the stuff they produce is going
to the final users, but half is going to other
intermediate good producers. That's a more correct
representation of production, so that the amount of activity going on in the firms is a lot more than what you
actually see in just GDP. I have a paper and there's a handbook of
monetary economics, it just came out,
I guess this year, that Woodford and Freedman did. I have a chapter in
there and we go through a Basu-type model
and we check to see, could this working
capital channel overturn the Taylor principle. Yes, indeed, when you
have a Basu-style world where you're not just
producing for final users, but also for other
intermediate good producers, then you have the potential
for much more borrowing and therefore a potential for
a higher interest rate to shift that Phillips
curve much more than you do in these
very, very simple models. 