Alan Krueger: I really
wish I had invited my parents to come listen
to Jim's introduction. It is a great honor
for me to have been invited to give the fell
sign lecture today. I have received encouragement, advice from Marty
throughout my career. Jim didn't mention I was
a research assistant at the NBER in 1984, the summer of '84 when Marty returned from the Council
of Economic Advisers. I remember when he came back,
1050 Massachusetts Avenue, they gave him a tour
around the building to show what had changed. Then I was fortunate
because I took public finance that
year from Marty and from Larry Summers where I learned a
tremendous amount, and became very excited about using economics
in public policy. Then I think really most importantly
throughout my career, Marty has been a source of
encouragement and support. When I was chairman of the CEA, Marty often visited me, took me to the Metropolitan
Club for dinner. We had a preexisting
relationship, so he could actually treat, and I really appreciated the advice and encouragement
he gave me at that time. I'm going to talk about a
topic today that Marty and I have discussed
on many occasions; how tight is the labor market? Which I think boils down
really to two questions. First, what's going on with
long-term unemployment? Are they more likely to leave the labor force or find a job? If they've already
left the labor force, are they likely to come back? I think those are key questions. Then the second question is, how do we think about
the U-6 measure, which I'm going to
say very little about because the U-6
measure is elevated, primarily because
of those who are part-time for economic reasons. If you look at work hours, I don't see a lot
of slack out there in terms of the
average workweek. I'm happy to discuss that
in terms of questions, but I'm going to focus
on what to me is the most important
question when we think about how tight the
labor market is. I had the occasion about
two years ago to brief the president on the
employment situation and the significance
of this picture is, I remember distinctly explaining that short-term unemployment
was back down to normal, long-term unemployment
was still elevated, and I said to President
Obama and Secretary Lew, "If we're going to make further progress lowering
the unemployment rate, it's primarily going to
be because the long-term unemployed find jobs or
leave the labor force." My feeling was that
unless we focus public policy on improving the odds of the
long-term unemployed, finding a pathway back to work, the natural forces of the way the labor
market operates would lead many of them to
leave the labor force. After I left the government
about a year-and-a-half ago, I wrote a Brookings
paper on that topic together with two Princeton
graduate students, John Kramer and David Cho. Part of what I'm
going do today is summarize those results
and extend them. We could see where
we got things right, where we got some things
wrong, what that means. I think the picture of
the US labor market is one of gradual improvement. I've been saying this
for the last five years. The US economy is healing. It's slowly healing from the great wounds from
the Great Recession, and I used to get poked fun at for saying the same
thing every month, and I said when
the business cycle changes I'll say
something different. I think we are
getting to a point now where the job market is getting very tight and
generating real wage growth, which I'll show you
some evidence on that. We've seen the unemployment
rate come down from 10 percent to 5.3 percent, and I think that represents real progress, real improvement, that long-term unemployment
has declined very rapidly from a high of 45 percent of the unemployed being out of work
for more than half a year, down to just about 25
percent last month, which is still high. But we've seen a big drop
in long-term unemployment. Unfortunately, I think
the primary reason is because a large number
of the long-term unemployed have left
the labor force. I'll show you some
evidence on that, and that's the cyclical
pattern that we normally see. Over the business
cycle in the US, the labor force
withdrawal rate for the long-term unemployed tends
to collapse in a recession. Then gradually, they tend
to exit the labor force, and I think there were a few
reasons that caused that. One is discouragement, one is unemployment
insurance benefits run out, and another is employers tend to discriminate against the
long-term unemployed. Now, I've been skeptical that
we're going to see much of a return to the labor force
of those who've dropped out, and I'll show you some
evidence on that. I'll also present evidence from a calibrated model of
matching in the labor market, which extends work that Kory Kroft and his
co-authors have done. Then finally I'll get to
the controversial part, which is the Phillips curves. If, as I have been arguing, the job market is getting tight, what's going on with wages? Are we seeing wage growth at about the rate one
would expect right now? If that leaves any time, I'll say something about
implications for policy. This shows you the unemployment
rate, as you know, peaked at 10 percent
in October 2009, was 5.3 percent in June. Apart from the time when
Marty was CEA Chairman, this is the fastest drop in the unemployment rate
the US has experienced. This shows you the share of workers who are
long-term unemployed. When I would teach about unemployment in my
labor economics class, I would say before
the great recession, we're seeing a secular rise
in long-term unemployment, and then it shot
through the roof shortly after the
recession ended. In 2010, early 2011, 45 percent of the
unemployed had been out of work for more than half a year. Typically in the US, that fraction fluctuated between 10 percent and 20 percent. Now we're nowhere
close to Europe, that's the good news. In Italy or Spain, 67 percent of the unemployed are out of work
for more than half a year. In fact, they use, as a definition of
long-term unemployment, out of work for
more than a year. But the US does have a
long-term unemployment problem, though it's been solving itself. As you can see here, we're down to just
over 25 percent of the unemployed out of work
for more than half a year. The picture isn't
quite as rosy if you look at the employment
to population rate, the share of the
population employed. That peaked when the
2000 census was done. In the last recovery, the recovery from 2001-2007, you notice the employment
to population rate was lower at the peak than it
was at the previous peak. That's the first time we've had that experience in US history. Then the employment to
population rate plunged, fell five percentage points
in the Great Recession, and it's recovered
only about one point. Now, the reason why the
unemployment rate looks so good and the employment to population rate looks so weak, of course is labor
force participation. The labor force
participation rate in the US peaked also right around the
time of the 2000 census, with 67 percent of people over age 16 in the labor force. It was lower at the end
of the previous recovery at 66 percent than it was
at the one before it. Labor force
participation actually was pretty stable
during the recession. You might think during
the Great Recession, when the unemployment rates
soared to 10 percent, people would have been
leaving the labor force, but it only fell three-tenths
of a point over a year-and-a-half
of the recession. The decline in labor
force participation accelerated after
the recession ended, and we're now down to labor force participation rate of 62.6 percent back to where it was when Jimmy Carter
was president. I used to do press interviews in the front lawn
of the White House, I'm sure Eddy and Marty
remember doing this, and Austan Goolsbee
with the sun shining in your eyes at 9:30
in the morning, and then I would get
asked frequently, "Aren't you concerned that labor force participation is back down to where it was when
Jimmy Carter was president?" But if you look at this graph, when President Obama
came to office, it was back down to
where it was when Ronald Reagan was president. We've been experiencing
a 15-year decline in labor force participation. What's driving it? Well, sensible analysis, and there are many ways
you could do this, but sensible
analysis of aging of the US population suggests that about a half of the drop from 67 percent down to 63 percent rounding is
due to population aging. You can just keep the age
distribution constant, and use the labor force participation
rates for different ages, and it looks like aging is responsible for
about half of the drop. What about the other half? Well, I think there are
two important factors. One is, some trends
that were taking place before the
Great Recession. Labor force participation
of women fueled the post-war rise in labor
force participation in the US that peaked around 2000. Not entirely clear
why it's peaked, and its edged down for many different
categories of women; single women, married
women, women with children. The main factor that was causing labor force participation
to rise came to an end. Labor force participation
for men has been declining throughout
the post-war period. That continued in the 2000s, and then labor force
participation of younger workers declined in part because
school enrollment increased, and ultimately that's probably a positive thing
for the US economy. If you make a projection of those trends prior to
the Great Recession, you could account
for about half of the half that not due to aging. What about the other quarter? Overall, that seems
to me to be cyclical. There are many ways
you could come to that similar estimate, that a little over a
percentage point drop in the labor force
participation rate is a result of the recession, and I'm going to show you some evidence which suggests it's unlikely we're going to see much of a recovery of that one percentage point or so drop in labor force
participation. Now, I've had this view for a while and I thought I'd do a little bit of a victory lap since nobody
ever read this article. I did get some criticism
for it at the time. In March 2011, I
wrote an article in Bloomberg saying that
the conventional wisdom now holds that the
unemployment rate should rise because
many workers who left the labor force will
come back and start looking for a job as
the economy improves. While many jobless
workers have indeed given up searching, I'm going on record
as a contrarian, I suspect the large rise in the labor force won't cause the unemployment
rate to jump. Instead, I suspect
we're going to see a continuing decline in the unemployment rate and then some uncharacteristic
understatement here. We might well see the labor
force shrinking more even as the measured unemployment rate falls and that's precisely
what has happened. Now, to show you that the conventional wisdom
was the other side, I thought I would show
you some quotes from Goldman Sachs Research Group, very well-respected
I think they do very good work and I think they represent I think the consensus in this area and I also
think they're wrong. In May 2011, they wrote
in their newsletter, we find that the labor
force participation rate is likely to stop falling, which would raise the
minimum amount of job growth needed to lower
the unemployment rate. Their forecasts then was for labor force participation
to rise from 64.2 percent to 64.6 percent and I think it ended the
year at 64.0 percent. Then about a year
later, March 2012, the labor force
participation rate is likely to stabilize. Demographics still push
towards lower participation, but the improving labor
market should encourage more marginal entrants
to join the labor force. Then January 2013, we expect the unemployment rate to
fall much more slowly from 7.8 percent now to 7.6
by the end of 2013, it actually felt at 6.7, which is a pretty big drop. The main reason is that we expect labor force participation to stabilize after three years
of significant declines. We expect the participation rate to stabilize because it's now a full percentage point
below its structural trend, defined as the rate
that would prevail of labor demand was
at normal levels. May 2014, labor force participation
has fallen by three percentage
points since 2007, despite the ongoing
structural drag from an aging
population we expect to stabilization and perhaps a small increase
in coming years. Last month. The sharp decline in both unemployment labor
force participation in June looks
statistically anomalous. At a certain point, I think you have to throw in the towel. Now, why was I expecting labor
force participation to continue to decline? I had published this
chart in Bloomberg. This shows you the monthly
labor force exit rate for the unemployed by
duration of unemployment. This is based on the current
population survey data. You will link from
one month to the next and you could look at the unemployed depending upon how long they've been unemployed, what's their chance of exiting the labor force in
the next month? If you have trouble reading
this from the back, the red and the purple lines at top are those who've
been out of work for more than half a year and the orange and green
line at the bottom are the short-term unemployed. You can see a very
strong cyclical pattern for the long-term unemployed. Labor force exit rates
tended to rise when the economy strengthened in the late 1990s for the
long-term unemployed. Then we had a mild recession in the early 2000s and the labor
force exit rate collapsed. Then we saw the same
pattern again and the recovery in the early 2000s, labor force exit rate gradually increased for the
long-term unemployed then it collapsed and just around the collapse was
when I wrote the piece for Bloomberg and I thought
that we would see the bounce back that you can see we've actually seen in the labor force exit rate for
the long-term unemployed. This is only partly a result
of changing composition. If you adjust for
the education and the occupation industry that the unemployed were coming from, you can account for a little less than 20 percent of this cyclical pattern for
the long-term unemployed. For the short-term unemployed, there's a cyclical pattern, but it's much weaker. What I was expecting in
2011 is that we would see labor force exit
rates return to something closer to normal for the long-term unemployed
and unless there was some effort to help the long-term unemployed
stay in the labor market, find a job, they would
exit the labor force. Now, if you look at the
transition rate to employment, the job finding rate
for the unemployed, what you see is almost
the opposite in that the short-term unemployed
are much more cyclical than the
long-term unemployed. The blue line on top
are people who've been out of work for
less than five weeks. In any given month, they have about a 35 percent chance of finding a job that tends to be higher
when the economy is stronger and it tends to
be lower in a recession. The red line at the bottom are those who've
been out of work for more than a year and that moves very little
over the business cycle. Even if you do these
graphs and logarithms, because the scale is different, you've reached the
same conclusions. Frankly, I don't think it makes that much sense
to do it in logarithms because if you want to look at the Markov transition matrix and try to use this to explain what's going on
or predict what's going to happen to
the labor force participation and unemployment, you don't want to do
it in logarithms. Again, composition plays a relatively small
role in these trends. Now, there's been a long debate in economics about whether the lower job finding
rate for the long-term unemployed is a result
of heterogeneity, perhaps unobserved because
I already told you the observed heterogeneity
doesn't do very much, or due to something about
unemployment changing people. What we call true
duration dependence. That debate has
not been resolved. It's inherently a very
difficult question. If you haven't
worked in this area, the issue with unobserved
heterogeneity is if people have different proclivities
for finding a job, those who have a higher
likelihood of getting a job sooner are going
to leave the pool of the unemployed so the
mix will change over time and that's very
difficult to address. You can make some
assumptions about the distribution of those types. You can make some
assumptions about the flow into unemployment
of those types. By enlarge that literature
suggests there's a lot of duration dependence, not that much unobserved
heterogeneity, on the other hand, is not an entirely settled
literature and I would be hard-pressed to
say it's all that convincing for what
I'm going to show you. For some things that matters, for other things
that doesn't matter, if the lower likelihood
of finding a job for the long-term unemployed is a result of unemployment, changing them or their characteristics
going into unemployment. For example, for thinking
about the Phillips curve, I don't think it actually
matters for thinking about policy interventions to help the long-term unemployed
I think it does matter. Just show you a little bit more. This is from our Brookings
paper where we use the SIPP, Survey of Income and
Program Participation, to look at the likelihood of a year later someone
finding a job. If you've ever
worked with the CPS, job flows data, you know
they're extremely noisy. People go in and out
of unemployment. Their duration doesn't always change the way you would expect. If they found a job and then become unemployed again,
you would expect, well, it's a new spell
of unemployment, but they often report
their unemployment at several weeks or months. I think it's actually
important to look at longer-term what happens to the unemployed and
this looks a year ahead. Instead of looking
at the next month, it's looking a year ahead. The blue line at the
bottom, it says, what's the chance of an unemployed worker who's been out of work a month, two months, three months, all the
way up to three years, that they're going to be in full-time steady
employment a year later? You see a couple of things. It's strikingly low
and it's declining. If you look at the
green line on top, that's the chance
of being out of the labor force a year later. As I said before, it's unclear whether
these trends represent the pool
of the unemployed changing over time or the nature of unemployment
changing people. I'm going to make an
argument soon that it's unemployment changing
people's prospects. This also uses the SIPP
data to look over time, looking at longer-term
transitions. What I wanted to highlight
here is if you're looking at, this is all long-term
unemployed people. If you look at the
long-term unemployed, the chance of going into a steady employment
back in the late 1990's was a little
less than 20 percent. Now, that's the strongest
job market that we've seen at least in my lifetime. Well since I got my degree, I'll say I was born in the '60s. Then if you look at
during the recession in 2001, it was about the same. The chance of the long-term
unemployed moving to steady full-time
employment doesn't seem to depend very much on the business cycle and
I think that's because the long-term unemployed
become more and more detached from the labor market. The experience of
being unemployed, I think makes it harder for people to get back on their feet and even a strong economy
doesn't solve that problem. You can see the same thing
if you look more recently. Using the SIPP data
in 2005, 2006, near the peak of
the last recovery, the transition rate into
full-time steady employment was not higher than
it was in 2009. It's also interesting to use the SIP data and say, well, what's happened to
the long-term unemployed? This looks at people who
became long-term unemployed between 2008 and June 2009
during the Great Recession. We could follow
them through 2013. Thirty-five percent
of those who became long-term unemployed we're
out of the labor force. By the middle of 2013, 14 percent were
still unemployed, 22 percent were employed
full-time steadily. Steadily here, by the
way, is a pretty low bar, it's four months in a row
of full-time employment. Just over a quarter, were working intermittently or working on part-time jobs. The biggest group
left the labor force. Why is it that
long-term unemployment has such adverse
effects on people? A lot of research suggests that long-term unemployment affects both the supply side
and the demand side. On the supply side, mental health and
self-esteem look like they're affected
by the experience of long-term unemployment. Until Von Watcher has done
very good work showing that physical health and mortality
are adversely affected. Family dissolution
and stress rises. Job search activity declines. Andy Mueller and I did a study where we followed workers on unemployment insurance
and we gave them the American time you survey
each week essentially. We also asked them directly, how much time did you
spend looking for job last week and how many
job applications that you submit and job
search activity tends to decline the longer
people are unemployed. The American time you
survey also shows that the unemployed tend to spend
more time by themselves, they tend to be more
socially isolated. Really interesting new
study by Jamison Toole and co-authors followed
cell phone records for a European country, they were not allowed
to tell which one and you'll see why in a moment. For workers who lost her job in a plant closing and then they compare them to other workers, they were less likely to receive phone calls and to
make phone calls. They were also physically more isolated because you can look
at what cell phone towers, their phones we're
connecting to. There were just a lot more
likely to stay at home. Long-term unemployment
is associated with repeated job loss, lower re-employment
earnings and all of this, I think points to a decline in human capital and also
leads to discouragement. On the demand side, studies have shown that
employers at least statistically discriminate against the long-term
unemployed. Kory Kroft, Fabian Lang, and Matt Notowidigdo, did a study where they
sent out resumes with varying gaps of time that
people were out of work. You can see the
likelihood that employers would call those people in for an interview depending
upon how long they were out of work and Lang Gaya did a very similar type of study with a similar
type of result. What about the prospects
of those who have left the labor
force re-entering? I tend to be very skeptical. For one thing, historically, we don't see much sign of that. This uses the CPS
data to look at monthly transitions from out of the labor force back
into the labor force. Now unfortunately, we can't do a very good job tracking the long-term unemployed
and the CPS, but we can look at all
of those are out of the labor force
and are they more likely to enter in a boom
time compared to a recession? If you look at the
blue line on top, which is the monthly
transition rate from out of the labor force
back into the labor force, it's unrelated to the state
of the business cycle. It looks a little bit like
somebody's heart rate, but without them doing
much activity in the middle, just bopping along. Then if you break it down, the green line shows you the
chance of going from out of the labor force directly to
employment and the red line, from out of the labor
force to unemployment. What's very interesting,
you could see a pattern where there is a
cyclical relationship between transitions from out of the labor force
back to employment. When the economy stronger
people are more likely to go directly from out of the
labor force to employment, we saw that in the late 1990s. You see it in the first recovery in the 2000s and you see it now. But offsetting that is the likelihood of
people going from adult labor force
to unemployment. This also shows you why the Goldman Sachs notion that a wave of people
are going to come from out of labor force back
into unemployment and obscure statistics on
unemployment and make us think the economy is getting weaker than it actually is, really didn't have much
chance of succeeding. We didn't see that
in the late 1990s, we didn't see it in the
recovery earlier in the 2000s, and we're definitely
not seeing it now. Here's some further
evidence and I think that the presumption that labor force
participation will make a cyclical recovery comes from a misreading of what happened in the recovery in the 1980s. Presumption is, I think a lot of people did
that the recovery in the early 1980s was very strong in labor force
participation rate grew very smartly after 1982
when the recession ended, but it was growing very
strongly in the late 1970s. If you just make a linear
forecast based on the 1970s, 79 trend line, labor force participation
never really caught up. It stayed about a
percentage point below where you would have predicted from the
previous trend line and I think this decline compared
to the trend was masked by the fact that labor force
participation was just growing very strongly in
the early 1980s. I wanted to show you
this because we did a more sophisticated version of that when I was at the
Council of Economic Advisers. Jim Stockdale as well before
probably worked on this where we took
different subgroups and we looked at the trend in their labor force participation rate and the decade before the recession in
1980 and a decade before the recession
at the end of 2007, and we were on different trends. The trend prior to
the recession in 1980 was for labor force
participation to grow by a percentage point over the next five years
and the trend from 2007 to 2012 was for it
to decline by 2.2 points. If you look at that compared
to what actually happened, I think I might have gotten
that a little bit reversed, but if you look at what
actually happened, we were about a point below what you would
have projected based on the trends for the
demographic groups after both of those recessions. Let me make a
transition now and talk about the Beveridge curve. The Beveridge curve is
the relationship between vacancies and the
unemployment rate. As you know, we've seen a very big shift in
the Beveridge curve in the US 2008, 2009. It's not unusual to have loops around the
Beveridge curve. A lot of research has shown that when you have a recession, the Beveridge curve
tends to shift out. Research by Peter, Diamond, and Aysegul, Sahin finds that at the end of a recovery
you tend to be back pretty close to the
original Beveridge curve. I've been waiting for us to make a left turn and come back to the original
Beveridge curve. If you use the short-term
unemployment rate, the Beveridge curve is stable. I don't want to make
too much out of this. But on the horizontal axis here, this shows the number of
workers have been out of work for less
than half a year relative to the labor force. This is just the
short-term unemployed. What seems to be the
case is the shifting out of the Beveridge
curve coincided with the great increase in
long-term unemployment. I want to do a little bit more to model the Beveridge curve. I just showed you
this is background. Also, I should have pointed out, this is looking at prime
age workers 25-54, because in subsequent
work I'm going to be looking at workers
in the same age group. This gets to the technical
part of my talk. What we did in our
Brookings paper was to extend the very
nice work of Kroft. I'm going to get
all the co-authors, Kroft, Lange, Notowidigdo, and Katz. A paper that's coming out in
Journal of Labor Economics, where they estimated a structural
model of job matching. We extend their model
in two respects. I think their model
does pretty well for the period that they
were looking at. How do we extend the model? First, the way that we allow the long-term unemployed to match the jobs is different. I think a little bit more
natural the way that we do it. Where we have this
matching function and we allow a lower coefficient for
the long-term unemployed. In their framework, you can
think about the long-term unemployed affecting the land in front of this
matching function. More importantly, we allow for differential flow rates into employment out of
the labor force for the short-term and
long-term unemployed. We follow a lot
of what they did. We fit the matching
function for 2002-2007. I think it's actually
important to think about that because there were not extended unemployment
benefits in that period. This story, if it works, doesn't really rely
that critically on extended
unemployment benefits. The model takes account of all the other flows
you can think of moving from out of the labor force into
short-term unemployment, out of labor force into
long-term unemployment, which is not so
easy to estimate. We focus on prime
age workers, 25-54, which in a way is making our challenge a
bit harder because early retirement probably not too much of an issue
for this age group. I think that's one of
the ways in which you see the long-term unemployed
leaving the labor force. But even if we look
at this age group, this shows you in red for the long-term unemployed out of
work more than half a year, we find the same
cyclical pattern that the long-term unemployed
are more likely to exit the labor force when
the economy is stronger and weaker cyclical pattern for the short-term unemployed. We estimate the parameters to simulate the path
of unemployment, the Beveridge curve,
and the share of long-term unemployed workers. Then we could do some
interesting counterfactuals, like we could say, suppose the labor
force withdrawal rate stayed where it was in 2010. How much would we have predicted the share of long-term
unemployment to decline? How much would we have
predicted the unemployment rate to decline over the
last four years? I'm going to use the
model to do that. Before I do that though, I want to emphasize one of
the findings that Kroft et al had which I
think is very significant. What they found is explaining the path of long-term unemployment is not difficult with this
type of a model. What happened was at vacancies collapsed, the V in the model. In 2008 at the beginning
of the recession, demand dropped through the
bottom, vacancies collapsed. That created a lot
of unemployment. People were initially
short-term unemployed. Over time, they became
long-term unemployed. The long-term unemployed have
a lower match efficiency. That accounts very
well in their model, which doesn't have a differential
labor force exit rate for the short-term or
long-term unemployed. That accounts very well for the rise in the share of
long-term unemployment and does okay in accounting for the shift
out of the Beveridge curve. One of the reasons why I
think the wrinkle that we've added is significant now, but not for what
they were looking at is the labor force exit
rate was about the same for the short-term
unemployed and the long-term unemployed in 2008, 2009, 2010. That started to
change after 2010. I want to show you
that we can explain or predict a loop around
the Beveridge curve. This is just from
the Brookings paper. The red line is the simulation. Again, using the parameters for the matching function
from 2002-2007, then using the actual path of vacancies and the
flows that we observe. It does predict this a loop
around the Beveridge curve. Although we get back to the
original Beveridge curve a bit quicker than we
would have predicted, which is a problem for
this model in general. The first counterfactual,
the red line, is our best simulation. This is using the actual path of labor force exits for
the long-term unemployed. In green, we say, let's not use the actual
path of labor force exits. Let's keep that fixed at
the average from 2010. What you can see is if
labor force withdrawal had been held constant at
the average in 2010, the share of workers
who are long-term unemployed would be
significantly higher. The difference accounts for about half of the decline in the share of unemployed workers who are long-term unemployed. The pattern that we saw, that cyclical pattern of labor force withdrawal for
the long-term unemployed is of economic significance. It can account for about half of the decline in the share
of long-term unemployed. What about the improvement in job finding rate
for the long-term unemployed? Not so much. The green line holds constant. The job finding rate
for the long-term unemployed at its
average for 2010. The red line shows
the simulation with the actual path and
they're not too far apart. Only about 10 percent
of the decline in the share of unemployed
workers who are long-term unemployed can be attributed to the improvement in
the job finding rate for the long-term unemployed. Now, that's looking
at the share of those who are long-term unemployed. We also care about the
unemployment rate. The unemployment rate fell
in our simulation by 3.9 percentage points from
January 2011 to June 2015. That's just about spot on what occurred for this age
group in the actual data. If we do this type
of a counterfactual, the rise in the labor force
withdrawal rate accounts or 8/10 of a percentage point. It accounts for about 20 percent of the decline in the
unemployment rate. It's significant, but
it's certainly not the lion's share
of the improvement in the unemployment rate. You know it couldn't
be the lion's share because long-term unemployed
only accounted for about half of this
group so they couldn't account for the full decline
in the unemployment rate. The job finding rate
improvement for the long-term
unemployed account for only 2/10 of a percentage point drop in the
unemployment rate. Likewise, the increase in the labor force
withdrawal rate for the short-term
unemployed accounts are just 2/10 of a point. The improvement in the
job finding rate for the short-term unemployed
accounts for 7/10 of a point. Together, these
factors account for about half of the drop in
the unemployment rate. The other flows that are really important is what I
showed you earlier. We've had a decline in
the number of workers moving from out of the labor
force into unemployment. That's actually a little bit faster than I think
one would have predicted from past years. We've also had a decline in movement from employment
to unemployment. This shows up in lots
of different ways. Unemployment insurance
claims are way down. Layoffs have declined. That accounts for the other half of the decline in the
unemployment rate. Now I said I'd get back
to the Beveridge curve. This is part of the
work that we did in the Brookings paper that
doesn't look so pretty. We made a projection
in our Brookings paper about the path of the
Beveridge curve under the assumption that vacancies
would continue to grow at the same pace they
had from 2011-2013. That the other flows in
our model would go back to their average level
in 2006 by 2016. We thought the labor market
should be normalizing. Here's a reasonable
path for vacancies. Does this get us back to the
original Beveridge curve? Then it gets us close to it. The problem is, what we've
seen is the red line, which has continued to parallel the original Beveridge curve
but to be shifted out. Now why were we so far off? About half of the reason
is that vacancies grew much more quickly than we had projected in the simulation. That's good news. I think it shows
that the economy is really strengthening. On the other hand, we've also seen a bigger drop from out of the labor force into unemployment than we were projecting in terms
of getting back to 2016 so that's why we didn't see unemployment drop as quickly
as we were projecting and we were projecting unemployment
to drop pretty quickly. We've seen unemployment drop quickly but
not fast enough. That leaves a big puzzle. What's going on with
the Beveridge Curve? Is this a sign that the labor market in the US
is now more inefficient? I have to say I'm
skeptical of that view. Eddie Luzier did a nice
paper at Jackson Hole which I think was also
skeptical of that view. Well, what else can
explain this path? Part of it I think,
is a result of the long-term unemployed
just matching more slowly. But long-term unemployment
is now down to 26 percent. Pretty soon it
will be back down, I think to close to normal that will help get us closer to the
Beveridge Curve, but not all of the way. I was initially
skeptical of some work that Steve Davis and John
Houghton Wagner had done, which argued that
vacancies might not measure the same thing
today that they used to, maybe companies are
not advertising as intensively or
really searching, maybe they're too choosy. The longer we wander away from the original
Beveridge Curve, the more likely I think that explanation may have some force. But I want to show you
another projection. I'm not giving up yet on getting back to the original
Beveridge Curve. What we do here, is assume that vacancies stay constant at their
most recent level, which was May 2015, and then all the other flows also stay constant
at their June level. Now you may remember in June, the unemployment rate dropped two tenths of a point so I
think this is a bit rosy. But under those assumptions, we would return to the original Beveridge
Curve by the beginning of 2017. We'll see what happens. I can skip over the summary. Let me turn to the
Phillips Curve. I'm going to briefly talk
about Price Phillips Curves, but I want to focus on
Wage Phillips Curves because the focus of my lecture is on how
tight the labor market is and I'm going to
avoid money illusion. I'm going to focus on
expected real wage growth. The model I have of
the labor market is around the
beginning of the year, companies and workers decide or bargain over pay increase
for the coming year, they're concerned
about real wages, they don t know what
inflation is going to be. Last year's inflation rates are pretty good estimate of
next year's inflation rate, so in much of the work
I've done previously, I've used last year's
inflation rate as the estimate of inflation
in the coming year, that's also fairly
common, I think, in the macroeconomics
literature. Let me talk about some
aggregate Phillips Curves and then some state-level work which is some of which is new. This shows you the
Price Phillips Curve. On the left, the total
unemployment rate is on the x-axis, and the change in the core PCE. PCE stands for Personal Consumption Expenditures
index is the y-axis. It's the acceleration version, or you can think of the
previous year is the expected. On the right, the dependent
variable is the same, but it's just the short-term
unemployment rate. You can see that the
relationship is more stable if you use the
short-term unemployment rate, although there's not
a whole lot of data. The dash line shows you the 95 percent
confidence interval. There was a puzzle
in 2009, 2010, '11. Why weren't we seeing deflation given how
high unemployment was? But if you use just the
short-term unemployment rate, we looked like we were about where you
would project to be. A lot of people have done these time series estimates and argued that long-term
unemployment matters less. The long-term unemployed put less pressure on the job market, I would say consistent
with the fact that they're on their way
out of the labor force. James Stock did early
work in this area, Rob Gordon, Mark Watson, there's an older
paper looking at many OECD countries
by Ricardo Llaudes. Then there are
alternative views. Ben Bernanke when
he observed that inflation wasn't
dropping as much as you would expect from
the Phillips Curve argued that inflation
expectations are anchored. Ball and Mazumber and
Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry have argued that
the Phillips Curve is convex. Then, most recently
the Fed Minutes argued that nominal
wages were rigid. Let me talk about wages. Here's a prototypical
Phillips Curve I'm going to show you you've got the percentage growth
in wages in period t, less inflation in
the previous period. Relate that to the
unemployment rate in your t. Sometimes I'll break
the unemployment rate into short-term, long-term. Sometimes I'll show
you a wage growth for different deciles. In fact, Larry Katz and I had a paper which I think of as the conventional wisdom coming
into the Great Recession. Larry and I had a Brookings
paper called The high pressure labor market
and the 1990s, where we estimated
those types of Wage Phillips Curves by decile. Then we calculated what is the unemployment rate
threshold at which you start to see expected
real wages grow. Larry came up with a
brilliant term; URZERCG. Unemployment rate
associated with zero expected real
compensation growth which is not done as well as
narrow but remarkably, you see for each of the deciles, that threshold is around
5.6, 5.7 percent. Prior to long-term
unemployment jumping up, I would say that the
conventional wisdom in the economics field was
that you start to see expected real wage growth
when the unemployment rate gets down below
5.6, 5.7 percent. For the median interestingly,
it was a little bit lower, although I'm sure it's not
significantly different, 5.4 percent. Now, two months ago, the unemployment rate was
five-and-a-half percent. By this logic, we should be expecting real wage
growth right about now. I think we're seeing
it a little bit earlier than right about now, my next contribution in this area was a table that
was not published as part of my Brookings paper
with Cramer and Cho where we estimate the
same Phillips Curves that others have
done for prices. and we just divide up
the short-term and the long-term unemployment
rate and you see you get a much bigger coefficient on the short-term
unemployment rate than you do in the long-term
unemployment rate. Short-term unemployment rate is highly statistically
significant. Long-term rate is
not insignificant. Test of the difference is
highly significant even with not too many
time-series data points. Now that created a
bit of a controversy, I want to show you that
it's actually held up okay. This chart shows you the
Employment Cost Index, which I think is the best
measure of wage pressure. The Employment Cost
Index was designed to be just like the
Consumer Price Index. BLS goes back to the same firms, they ask about the
same work groups. This shows nominal wage growth from the ECI, a 12-month change. You can see over
the last 12 months, the ECI is up to 2.8 percent nationally and it looks like
a bit of an upward trend. More importantly, for
the way I model things, this subtracts off the previous year's
core price inflation. Here we're seeing
real wage growth, expected real wage
growth of 1.5 percent. If you looked at
real wage growth, it's actually stronger because
inflation was so low in 2015 and that's the strongest that we've seen
over the last 15 years. This shows you on the left, the Phillips Curve, which is fit from two, from 1978-2008 using the
total unemployment rate, and on the right,
using the short-term unemployment rate. Realized ECI is certainly within the 95 percent confidence
intervals and if you use either one it's within the 95 percent
confidence interval, if you use the total
unemployment rate, it's actually stronger
than you would predict. If you use the short-term
unemployment rate, it's basically
right on the line. Now, I don't want to make too much out of the time series data because I'm a labor economist I'll come back to
that in a moment. Now, you could say, well, maybe I cherry
picked and the ECI shows the strongest
growth, which is true. This shows our average
hourly earnings. Again, subtracting off the previous year's
core price inflation from the CES survey, the BLS establishment survey for production and non
supervisory workers. Also in the first
half of this year, the rate of wage
growth has picked up. Not as strong as in the ECI, but we're seeing
real wage growth from the average hourly
earnings as well. I should also point
out that this is a very flaky series. It was a real
puzzle in the 1970s or in the 1980s and early 1990s. Why this particular series was showing such
little wage growth. This shows you the
Phillips curves using the CES data and there's
really nothing alarming. If you look at the
graph on the right, it looks like if you made a projection based
on the Phillips curve, you'd be reasonably accurate. Now this created a
whole cottage industry of state-level Phillips curves. I think the logic is you get a lot more
variability if you could use a time pattern across the states as opposed
to just nationally. Now, whether that's
appropriate variability or not is a question that's
not addressed much. This is a good
headline to wake up to from The Wall Street Journal and I've actually found
six different studies that the regional economists at the regional Feds and the
Board of Governors have done, and really they're at
odds with each other. The first one listed here is by two economists
at the Dallas Fed. They're estimating wage
Phillips curves where they put at state level, state by year using CPS data, where they divide up the short-term and long-term
unemployment rate. I highlighted in green
estimates that are consistent with what I found
in the macro time series. The short-term unemployment
rate is significant. The long-term unemployment
rate is insignificant. If you have trouble
reading the details, when they use average wages, they find the short-term unemployment
rate is significant. That's why it's green and
long term is insignificant. If they use change
in the median wage, they find that both coefficients are significant and about
the same magnitude. The second paper was done by economist at
the New York Fed. The third one, The Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago. The fourth one, by Kylie, was from the Board of Governors. His dependent variable is the growth in the
CPI within the SMSA. I have a lot of concerns
about whether inflation is determined by local
economic conditions in price inflation
or nationally, since a lot of our product
markets are national. I'm also worried that calculating the short-term
unemployment rate and long-term unemployment rate for SMSAs and then controlling for SMSA dummies and time dummies doesn't leave you
much variability, but does leave you
a lot of noise. At the state level.
I've actually convinced myself that there's
enough signal with the sample sizes in
the CPS that you can identify short-term and long-term unemployment effects. The fifth one by Smith looked at wages,
also Federal Reserve. Number 6 is from Higgins
at the Atlanta Fed. Looked at average
hourly earnings. I'll let others comment on
whether you could predict what these studies might find by what the heads of
the regional Feds, whether they're considered
to be hawks or doves. I did my own analysis and
what I found is consistent, I think with those
previous studies in that you get somewhat
different result if you use the average hourly
wage as opposed to the median wage and it's a
little bit of a mystery why, and the results are sensitive to how the states are weighted, how the wage is calculated. Some of the earlier papers use the wage measure that
didn't include overtime. I think that's a bit of a concern if you're
want to look at how a stronger economy
affects wage growth. Anyway, I get results that are very similar to the
Atlanta Fed and the Dallas Fed and also I suppose to the
Board of Governors, because if you use the median, you don't get a
difference between the short-term unemployment rate in the long-term
unemployment rate, at least not a statistically
significant difference. The time effects, by
the way, don't have an enormous effect
on these results. I'm not sure you've actually
gained all that much by using the state did and absorbing the
aggregate time effect. Now one might say, well,
why would it be that a lower long-term
unemployment rate helps raise the median wage, but not the average wage. Well, it's possible that the long-term unemployment
rate matters more for the median worker than
it does certainly at the top end because people at the top end don't suffer
much unemployment at all. Next I look by decile and that story
doesn't work so well. If you look at the
10th percentile, the long-term unemployment
rate doesn't matter at all. I'm not entirely sure
what's going on. We do get something
of a difference between the median
and the average. I think for monetary policy, you should care
about the average. If you're worried about
wage growth being associated with price
pressure and price inflation, that's an issue for the
average now for the median. But that's something I'm
happy to discuss further. Let me briefly
comment on policies. One of the overriding
lessons I take away from this research is we want to avoid the problem of
long-term unemployment. Long-term unemployment can have hysteresis
type of facts. I think the US labor
force participation rate will be for a long time, lower than it otherwise would be as a legacy of the
Great Recession, probably around a
percentage point. Also, I think that causes
whatever economic harms that causes pales compared
to the costs to the individuals who are going through that type
of a situation. I think one would want to use overwhelming force to avoid the problem in the first place. Second, I think it's
cyclical recovery where industry specific
policy would not be sufficient to solve the problem. The reason why I say
industry-specific policy would not be sufficient, the long-term unemployed
or a big concentrated in construction and a bit
concentrated in manufacturing, but they're spread
throughout the economy. That leads me to
think more about targeted policies to help
the long-term unemployed, particularly early
on in a recovery, like a tax credit
for employers to hire those who are
long-term unemployed. Perhaps direct employment,
public service employment, or supported work for private sector companies
to hire the long-term unemployed to avoid the
histories effects, volunteering. I think part of the
phenomenon that we're seeing comes about
because of the long-term unemployed
become isolated, their skills atrophy, and if they volunteer, some research has shown that
they make new connections, they learn new skills
and that could help them find a job. Job search assistance
has typically been found to be effective
in the US to help many groups of
workers find employment. One interesting ideas to have a probationary period of
employment for the long-term unemployed where the
unemployment insurance office pays for the compensation for the employees over that period. I think wage loss insurance
is worth considering, especially for older
long-term unemployed workers. But now I think the problem has gone on for sufficiently long. We need to think about it
more as a structural problem. I think that leads us to think about the types of policies that could address the
structural decline in labor force participation. Family-friendly policies
that might help to encourage more women to
join the labor force. It's maybe one reason why
many European countries have had rising labor
force participation of women compared to us, perhaps disability
insurance reforms. Hopefully I left some
time for questions. Just summarize by saying, I think we're seeing the
economy continue to improve, the labor market
continuing to heal. I think that process
is likely to continue. I think it will
probably slow down because a good part of the
drop in unemployment by no means all but a good
part was from the long-term unemployed leaving
the labor force and that ought to slow down. Also as the unemployment
rate gets lower, It's hard to imagine how we are going to be
able to continue growing at 220,000 jobs a month. I think it's very
important to consider the cyclical pattern of labor force withdrawal for
the long-term unemployed. I remain skeptical that
we're going to see a wave of labor market dropouts
re-entering the labor market. Now I think we have a
structural problem on our hands and I am pleased to see
stronger real wage growth. I think the US has gone for too long with weak
real wage growth. This may indeed
affect labor share, which has fallen to
historically low levels. I suspect we're going to see a continuation because I think the labor market is just below the point where one would expect to see real wage growth. 