Stanley Fischer: Well,
I'm extremely grateful to Jim for the very
kind things he said in the data he made up on
various aspects of my career. I'll add one, Jim. I thought that when I
came to this lecture, I would recognize no more than five
percent of the people. Well, I guess the profession has been aging a bit with me because I see a lot
of people that I know and interacted with and
enjoyed interacting with in various
ways in the past, and thank you all for
coming to this event. Customary to say
it's an honor to deliver not one of
these lectures, a named lecture, but this really is an honor. Martin has had a
remarkable career. He's the founder
of the modern NBER as the primary center
of applied policy, relatively applied
economic research. The modern NBER is
not only impressive, it's remarkably user-friendly, it's remarkably successful, and also seems to
be very efficient. I wrote that down before, I heard about Rob Shannon being the only person who
apparently runs this. Sorry, Jim. I've been thinking about
Martin's successes and one of these successes is knowing how to choose people. Well, Kate, this wasn't
directed at you, but it's certainly relevant. This institution
of the summer camp is really an extraordinary one. At the same time, Martin continued with his
own research program on a huge range of issues which developed over the
years and hasn't ended, but it included more recently national
security and defense. Add to that the superb set
of students he's advised and produced and an
almost unparalleled ability to work jointly
with his students. He has left a remarkable
impact on the profession. He, I think, has left an imprint
on the profession to an extent that
almost no one can match in terms of his
own contribution, and that he has encouraged
through others. I'd like to add a personal
note on behalf of Rhoda and myself and our children, to thank Kate and Martin who have been the most constant, the most thoughtful,
the most generous, and the most pleasant of
friends for over 40 years. We are indeed grateful to
them for their friendship and for the many
very good things they've helped us do. For both professional
and personal reasons, I'm honored to have
been chosen to deliver the Martin
Feldstein lecture. Now I didn't know when I was
asked to do this lecture, that I was going to be
the vice chair of the Fed when the time came. I didn't think anybody would have remotely consider
that possibility, but now I just heard Jim say, he was known in the
least surprised, which bothers me a bit, Jim. This was all planned. I didn't know about
what I'd have when I was nominated
and said yes, but I did choose the topic after I knew I was
going to join the Fed. Now, these are things
which as professors, I used to regard as
a technical detail with no particular importance how you do supervision
and regulation of banks. You tend to think
that sort of thing until it rises up and
hits you in the face. There would've been
a good idea to know something about a
topic like that. I can remember
countless examples which I'm too
embarrassed to tell you about of similar things we say. Not interesting, not
important, forget about it and somebody would come and want to write a thesis, and so that's nothing, and then a year or two later, you'd realize you
gave them bad advice and it was a very good thing. The same with financial
sector reforms. What I'm going to do is talk about aspects of the
implementation of the financial sector
reform program that was widely agreed
at the early stages of the global financial crisis. It is actually quite remarkable that an international
group of regulators and supervisors in the Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision and later in the Financial
Stability Board, both of them now bodies which include the G20
countries plus a few more. There is a law which I'm almost willing to give you
five dollars to bet on, that there is no G which
has a number of members that is represented by the
number that follows the G. The G20 consists of
about 26 countries, and I can go on with a
variety of examples. The reason they're almost always more is that when you
leave somebody out there, somebody really insistent, who manages to push
his country's way in. Well, we're talking
about measures which were introduced or thought about during the
worst economic crisis and the worst financial
crisis since the 1930s. I'm giving a little
bit of background because very easy
to forget it now, I'm always impressed when people say you
should have done this, you should have done that, and forget to say
at the beginning, but what you did was pretty done good considering this situation. Following the collapse
of Lehman Brothers, many of us thought that
we were about to witness a second Great Depression
that did not happen. In large part because policymakers had learned some of the lessons of the
Great Depression. Nonetheless, the advanced
economies were put through severe economic
and political tests. Fortunately, policymakers
succeeded in dealing with the situation better than many had feared they would. Unfortunately, we're still
dealing with the consequences of the collapse and the steps
necessary to deal with it. Now, I've heard Barney Frank say that economists have
a wonderful technique that of the
counterfactual to analyze what is being achieved
by preventing disasters. But that real people
base their judgments more on the current
state of the world than on disasters that
might have been. Well true as that is, we should from time to
time allow ourselves to recognize that bad as the
Great Recession has been, it would have been
much worse had policymakers not undertaken
the policies they did, many of them unorthodox
and previously untried to deal with
the imminent crisis that confronted
the United States and the rest of the world after the fall of
Lehman Brothers. For that, we owe them our
gratitude and our thanks. Now to the topic; The Financial Sector Reforms. These were prepared
within a few months of Lehman Brothers failure, which is quite impressive. If I learn how to
operate this thing, we'll see what the main
elements of the program were. There were nine main strands and I'm putting them up there because I'm going to read them, there's a lot of them, and it may help for you
to see them as well. This is not a slight lecture, this is a lecture illustrated
by a couple of slides. The first strengthened
the stability and robustness of
financial firms with emphasis on governance, on risk management, on
capital, and on liquidity. I'm going to talk about
capital and liquidity as the first of the three
topics of the nine here that I'm taking up. Not go through all of them, but strengthen the
quality of prudential and effectiveness of
prudential regulation and supervision, build the
capacity for undertaking effective macro-prudential
regulation and supervision and I'm going to say
something about that. Develop suitable
resolution regimes for financial institutions and then strengthen
international coordination of regulation and supervision, especially for regulation
and resolution of G-SIFIs. Now it doesn't matter what
applied field you're in, there are acronyms and
you go to a meeting and if you haven't been to the
first meeting, you're lost. But once you've been
once you get it. A G-SIFI is a globally
that the G is added because not all are Gs, are SIFIs most of them, systemically important
financial institutions. There's been a lot of the
focus of the reforms, the regulatory reforms have been to deal with the big banks, which are the SIFIs
and the G-SIFIs. Number eight, find
appropriate ways of dealing with the
shadow banking system. I will add a word
on that at the end. That's what we're
going to focus on and I'm going to focus
on three topics. Capital and liquidity,
macroprudential supervision, and a special topic
which embraces several of these called
too big to fail. Those are going to
be my three topics. Well, let's start with
capital and liquidity. At one level, the story on capital and liquidity
ratios is very simple. From the viewpoint
of the stability of the financial system
more of each is better. That's it from the
stability viewpoint. This is the principle
that lies behind the vigorous campaign waged by Anat Admati and Martin Helweg to increase capital ratios set out in their
book The Bankers' New Clothes: What's
Wrong with Banking and What to Do about It. On the cover of the book, the bankers seem to have relatively few clothes in
their description of it. Well, at what level
should capital and liquidity ratios be set? We don't have a terrific
theory on that. In practice, the base from which countries work is
agreement among the regulators and
supervisors who belong to the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision. That's where many of these
agreements come from and they've typically
been spread to the world through
another body, the Financial Stability
Board, the FSB. Following the global crisis, the Basel Committee move to
the Basel III agreement, which strengthens
capital requirements, as opposed to Basel II, which tried to build
regulation primarily on measures of risk capital set by internal models developed
by each individual bank. That's quite ambitious
or quite trusting. It didn't work for two reasons. One, the required regulatory
minimum capital ratios were too low but also because any set of risk weights
involves judgments, you've got to make judgments
about correlations about which you know very
little, for example. Human nature rarely
results in people choosing risk weights that make them require to
hold more capital, so there's a problem there. In the United States now, the new regulations require large bank holding companies to use risk-weighted assets
that are the greater of those produced by the
firm's internal models or produced by set
of standard weights supplied by the regulators. There's a minimum from
the standard weights that the regulators
have agreed on and that's somewhat
of an achievement. Well, what is being achieved, now if I start with globally, a lot has been achieved
and I should say that. The minimum Tier
1 capital ratio, Tier 1 is pure
capital more or less, has been raised
from four percent to six percent of
risk-weighted assets. Second, there is a capital
conservation buffer, an extra buffer of 2.5 percent
of risk-weighted assets, and banks are required
to build this up as they earn profits. The required assets
are 8.5 percent, they were four percent and the required capital
ratio is 8.5 percent, it was four percent. There will in addition be a counter-cyclical
capital buffer that regulators can raise
and lower when needed. It used to be a big puzzle, Larry Summers always used
to say about IMF programs. I don't understand why
they set minimum reserves that countries have to
hold and they give him the countries just enough
money to hold those reserves. What are they going to do when they actually
need reserves. Well, the capital buffers
are the answer to that question in the
case of the banks. They've also set a
minimum leverage ratio of three percent, that's the ratio of
Tier 1 capital relative to total on balance
sheet assets. Typical ratio of on-balance
sheet of total assets to risk-weighted to total is about 60 percent of
the risk weights are less than one, many of them. Then in the United States, the Federal Reserve
is planning to propose risk-based
capital surcharges for US Global SIBs, systemically important banks and those are going
to be raised. The regulators have also raised the minimum leverage ratio for Global SIBs to five percent as opposed to the three
percent set in Basel. If they don't meet
the five percent, they will not be able
to distribute dividends and pay discretionary
employee benefits, so this is a serious constraint. Foreign bank organizations with US non-branch
assets of 50 billion or more will have to form
US holding companies that need essentially the
same capital requirements as US bank holding companies with $50 billion
or more of assets. Many of these rules don't
apply to community banks because they have a
different business model. I wanted to add one
point on bank capital, the Swiss and Swedish
regulators have gone far in raising
capital requirements, including by raising bail integral secondary holdings of capital in the form of CoCos, Contingent Convertible
Capital Obligations. The US may be heading
in a similar direction, not by using CoCos. CoCos define conditions under which they convert from
being bonds to being equity. What the US regulators decided or nearly decided is that they're going to require
minimum amounts of "Gone concern loss observancy." The editor of this speech told me she wanted to change that to going concern
loss absorbency, but it's really gone concern. When it goes, these
bonds are sold and used to finance
internal recapitalization through a new resolution
liquidation mechanism created by the Dodd-Frank Act. There are also liquidity
rules which I won't go into. What are the critical
results so far? Tier 1 common equity ratio. This is the one that should be a minimum of 8.5 percent by
international agreement, which US regulators
have raised a bit, was around seven percent
before the crisis, is now around 11
percent on average for the largest 25
bank holding companies in the United States. There are also, as I mentioned, the liquidity constraint, the ratio of liquid assets
to total assets has risen from a peak in the
first decade of this century of about 12
percent to over 20 percent. These are very significant. There was a big every regulator who told banks to raise capital
and liquidity who said, "Okay we won't make any
loans and so forth." The answer they got
both from the Fed and from Mark Carney who was in the Canadian
supervisor was you are going to raise
your capital ratios through the numerator, not through the denominator. That is much harder
because that means you can't do it by
running of assets. The bottom line to
date is that there is a very significant
increase in capital and in liquidity held by the largest banks in
the United States, which account for about 80 percent of the
banking system. At the same time, the introduction
of macroeconomics, supervisory stress tests
in the US has added an important element to the assessment of
capital adequacy. As firms are required to hold a capital buffers
sufficient to withstand a several year period of severe economic
and financial stress. The stress tests are very important addition to
toolkit of supervisors. One that is likely
to add significantly to the quality of financial
sector supervision. I ran around myself saying
for quite some time, well, this was a
supervisory failure and we're not doing
much about supervision. Well, actually the
stress tests are very significant innovation
in the supervisory field. That's capital and liquidity. John Riedl asked me, again I'm going to
answer the question? The answer on this one is yes. That's being improved
significantly. It's been dealt
with significantly. Is it enough? Well,
time will tell. If we had better models to
determine what's enough. The problem with meeting the one in a 100 year test is that they show a tendency to come
up every 10 years or so. But you've got to find
something like that. Now I'm on to macroprudential
and supervision. Well, macroprudential
policy has two meanings. As the original one, which people glommed onto when Lehman failed and
the world blew up. That relates to the
need to understand that the financial system is a system and that if you pull something
out of the middle of it, it has more consequences than
the failure of that firm. It was a desire to supervise the financial system as a whole, emphasizing interactions among financial markets
and institutions. That's the use as described by those impressed by Lehman. The second relates to
the use of regulatory or other non-interest
rate tools of policy to deal with problems arising from the behavior
of asset prices. For instance, when you ask
a central bank governor, how are you going to deal with rising housing
prices at a time when for whatever reason, the central bank doesn't want
to raise the interest rate. They will say, we'll use
macroprudential policies. By that they mean policies
that will make it more difficult in some way or the
other to finance housing. Now, these sector-specific
regulatory and supervisory policies
were used extensively and systematically in the
United States between the end of World War II
and before the start of World War II until about the 1990s and are
now being used, continue to be used in other advanced and
developing countries. I think central
bankers are very proud when they got rid of those. Finally, we've got a clear tool which we can use
the interest rate, bank, it works. Forget all that other stuff
the markets will do it. We're not going to intervene in this market or that market. Well, we're going
back to the future. The issue of how monetary
policy should relate to asset price inflation
has been on the agenda of central bank
is for a very long time. There are people here who
remember papers in the 1960s. I remember when Armen
Alchian and Benjamin Klein, which argued that we should
deal with asset prices by putting the prices of assets in this consumer price index. That way you'd have
to be stabilizing a measure of present
and future prices that didn't go anywhere
with the policy community. The issue became more prominent in the United
States in the 1990s and in the first few
years of this century and it temporarily culminated in the Feds mopping up approach, namely that monetary policy, meaning the interest rate, should not react to
rising asset prices or suspected bubbles
to the extent that they affect
either employment and/or price stability. Rather, monetary
policy should wait to mop up the mess after
the bubble bursts, including for instance, by
reducing the interest rate. That's what the
mopping up is about. Well, you would perhaps say
that doesn't sound right. But this policy was
tested in the bursting of the tech bubble in 2001 and it appeared to be successful as the economy recovered from 2002 onward without the use of what is now thought of
as macroprudential policy. The use of regulatory
and supervisory measures to deal with undesired
asset movements. Now the word macroprudential is used primarily in the
second sense of the use of regulatory and supervisory
non-interest rate tools to affect asset prices. Now I want to go from
etymology to economics. I want to review
my experience with macroprudential policies
in the second sense, non-interests, regulatory,
and supervisory policies. I'm reviewing my experience as Governor of the Bank
of Israel to draw a few key lessons about
the use of these policies. To set the background, there was no financial crisis in Israel during the
Great Recession. But as domestic interest rates declined along
with global rates, housing prices began to rise. Well, this is a normal part
of the adjustment mechanism. I'm looking at Greg, I think, you have a couple of papers
using that approach. Is expected to encourage an increase in the
rate of homebuilding. Well, that's what
happened in Israel. They started building
more houses, but not sufficiently more to
meet the demand for housing and prices continued to rise. Starting in 2010, the supervisor of banks who
reported to the governor, which was me, of
the Central Bank, began to implement a
series of measures to reduce the supply
of housing finance, let's say the effective
supply of housing finance. Here is a list of
the major measures. This I want to go through
because this includes almost everything
that's been used in the world to deal
with housing prices. First they increase
the provisions that banks had to make against loans with
high LTV ratios, then they increase capital
requirements against floating rate loans
with high LTV ratios. May 2011, and I'll
come back to this, they limited the share of any housing finance
package index to the short-term interest rate to 1/3 of the total loan. I'll explain what that's about. The Bank of Israel interest rate was reduced to 50 basis points. The banks, who everybody
says never compete, were competing in
selling mortgages and they really competed. They've got the spread
down to 60 basis points. You could get a
floating rate mortgage, a 30-year mortgage
if you wanted one, at 1.1 percent index the
Bank of Israel rate. Not surprisingly, that was attractive
to a lot of people. Well, the measure was
that not more than 1/3 of mortgage could consist
of loans like that. The other 2/3 had to be indexed or nominal or had
to be adjustable to a five-year rate
with a five-year wait. Either the real rate
or the nominal rate. That was a huge change, we didn't quite think so then. I was thinking through it, the yield curve was steep and the nominal real rate
was about four percent. In effect, you took 2/3 of
what had been one percent and raised it to somewhere
like 3.5-4 percent. That's a very severe rate
rise in the interest rate and it worked quite effectively. But prices have kept on rising. But that one had an
effect you could see and it set prices
back for awhile. 2012, they limited the LTV
ratio and housing loans to 75 percent for
first-time buyers with tighter limits
for other buyers. This is the limit to 75
percent is a political move. Because the
first-time buyers are what in Israel will
call young couples. You mess with young couples access to finance
and it's a problem. This actually reduced their LTV, but it made a lot of noise. Then in 2013 they
limited the maximum, this is after I left. August year, was two months after I left. They limited the
maximum payments to income ratio of borrowers
to 50 percent with 100 percent risk weight on loans with a payment income of
more than 40 percent. The evaluation of
the Bank of Israel is the measure that sharply
raised the cost of housing. The effective interest
rate was very effective. That the payments to income and LTV limits were
moderately effective, and that there was not
the big difference which the literature finds. The literature says
PT payments to income is more
effective than LTV. That was not the case in Israel. But that the measures which tried to affect
the cost of finance to the banks had
very little effect. Making them provision more, making them raise
their risk waits didn't do a whole lot. I think that must have had something to do with
effect that they were able to get deposits
at extremely low rates. It didn't make a
heck of a lot of difference what they're doing. Anyway, that's the
set of measures that we hit that
we used in Israel and I want to mention three key lessons
from this experience. They don't follow from
what I've told you now, all of them, but
they are important. First, the Bank of
Israel did not have good empirical estimates of the effectiveness
of these measures. What we typically
did was to calculate the impact of a
particular measure on the effective cost of
finance to the borrower. That always
overestimated the impact and the measures
were not very good. But we knew that we didn't
have good estimates. What do you do when you've
got uncertainty like that? Particularly when you don't
want to kill a market, you have cautious. I believe that because
of the uncertainty and the lack of experience
with these badges, we did too little
on many occasions. Second thing, everybody
has to remember, measures aimed at
reducing the demand for housing are likely to be
politically sensitive. This is not like
the interest rate. The world thinks the
interest rate is neutral. It isn't. You raise the interest rate, you don't affect
every sector equally. But somehow the world's
got over the fact that typically hits interest
rate sensitive for spending and thinks that's pure monetary
policy and that's okay. Given that measures aimed at reducing demand for housing are likely to be
politically sensitive, the use requires very cautious
and well-aim measures by the regulatory authorities and may require the use
of government subsidies to compensate some of those who are affected by the
imposition of these measures. One often sees, and I've seen it in
other countries as well that is a conflict between serious risk
management by the banks and what the political
system wants to happen through housing finance. That's an underlying
source of problems in the use of
macro-prudential policy. Third, there's generally a
need for coordination amongst several regulators
and authorities in dealing with
macro-prudential problems. Regulation among independent
authorities is hard. If you don't have
somebody who can say, however it's done, you
do this, or you do that, everybody's going to insist
on their independence and they are independent. Well, there are many models
of regulatory coordination, but let me focus on only to the British and the American. As is well known, perhaps not to everyone
in this audience, the UK has reformed financial sector
regulation and supervision by setting up a Financial
Policy Committee, the FPC, located in
the Bank of England. It is the supervisor of the
whole financial system. That committee can
issue any orders to the financial intermediaries. The major reforms in
the United States came through the Dodd-Frank Act. That's set up a
Coordinating Committee among the major regulators, which is the FSOC, the Financial Stability
Oversight Council. There's a nice
paper by Don Cohn, who used to be deputy
vice chairman of the Fed before Janet Yellen got the job, who has been appointed to the British Financial
Policy Committee located in the Bank of England. The British are really
very good about not worrying about nationality and choosing the best governor, if he happens to be from
Canada, that's fine. They've got foreigners on their Financial
Policy Committee. Don has written a very
interesting article in which he says that there is a difference
between an organization which has a legal power
to impose policy changes and regulators and one
which is supposed to coordinate among
independent regulators without any power to
get them to do things. He says, well, there's no
unique regulatory model in the UK structure of macro
prudential supervision is not ideal for all
countries at all times, etc. But he clearly thinks
there are advantages to the Financial
Policy Committee. He looks at the
structure of the FSOC, our regulatory body, and suggests six changes which two are the
most important. The first is that every
regulatory institution in the United States should have the goal of
financial stability added to its mandate. Many of them don't. You can't tell them
what you're doing, it's going to bring
financial instability that somebody else has
to deal with that. Then he also says, and this I think is
very delicately said. This is his sixth suggestion. To give more
independence the FSOC, it should also be given
tools that can be used expeditiously to
address systemic risks. He doesn't explain how
that's to be done, but clearly, that's a measure. Don is very careful
about what he says, but he is pointing to
things which are important and which we need
to think about. I think it may well
be that adding a financial stability mandate to the overall mandates of all
financial regulatory bodies would help financial stability
in the United States when the need comes to
have that stability. On number 2 issue,
macroprudential supervision, it's not as simple vee or take, there's more work to be done and some of it may
be quite difficult. Finally, I want to talk
about too big to fail. The diagnoses of what went wrong with the financial
system at the start of the Great Recession
generally placed very heavy emphasis on the
problem of too big to fail. I'm going to quote my
colleague governor again, Dan Derulo, who explains what happens when governments
are confronted by the potential failure
of a large bank. Dan says, "No matter what is general economic
policy principles, a government faced with
the possibility of a cascading financial crisis, that could bring down
its national economy." In his view, tends to err on
the side of intervention. Doesn't matter what your
principles were beforehand. When you see the train
about to bear down on you, you start getting active
and deciding to do things. There's a question, why do
we have too big to fail. There's one view that the large banks have
a funding advantage. They can fund themselves more cheaply than the smaller banks, and therefore, being large, they tend to get larger. A lot of empirical work that's attempted to estimate
these premiums in terms of lower cost
of financing that the larger banks
typically receive. Well, these results vary a lot, but I'll give you some
estimates from the IMF in it April 2014 Global Financial
Stability Report. They say that in the
United States in 2013, large banks generally had a premium of about
15 basis points, that is, they paid 15
basis points less. In Japan, it was between
25 and 60 basis points, about the same in the UK
and in the Euro area, 60 to 90 basis points. Well, those sound like not much, but you have to remember
that a law I learned from Herbert Stein
many years ago, which is the difference between two percent and three
percent is 50 percent. The difference 60 to
90 basis points on the cost of capital for a bank is a significant difference. Whether it's big enough to
generate the differences in sizes that we see
is very unclear. There's also been work done on economies of
scale in banking. The early work say there
are no economies of scale beyond a balance sheet
of about 100 billion. There are more recent work. There is increasing body
of research that says that in fact there are
economies of scale, and some of them, as you read the
literature look to be economies of scope actually. They do different things. That the larger
banks may be more efficient than the
smaller banks, or some people put it, there are certain activities
that you only can do in a very large financial
institution. Now the theory of
too big to fail and the theory is that
large banks are a problem from the viewpoint of stability has to contend with the
history of the Canadian and the Australian
banking systems. Both these systems have
several very large banks, but both systems have
been very stable. In the Canadian case, they haven't had a financial
crisis for 150 years. If this paper had
been given in 2005, Martin, if you'd retired
a few years earlier, we would have added the
British banking system to that list, but it's way off that list. The empirical results on what is the connection between the concentration banking system and the number of failures
or the extent of failures, says actually the
concentrated banking systems are not more unstable. That's a problem that
one has to deal with. I've spoken to a few people who have experienced
about all this and I will add one factor
that I believe is important. I spoke to a veteran of the international central
banking community and said, "How do you
reconcile these things?" He said, "Those Canadian banks
aren't very adventurous." Well, I take that
to be a compliment. I think he thought
it was anything. Well, why is this issue so
important in the debate on reforming the
financial system? It can't be because
big banks never fail. Some do, financial institution certainly failed in
the great recession, including Lehman Brothers
and Washington Mutual, other banks who emerged
out of existence, often in very low prices with the FDIC managing
the resolution process. Banks in the UK and Europe failed during the
Great Recession. It cannot be because
equity holders never lose in bank
crises, they lose big. It could be because until now, bondholders and large
banks rarely have lost. That's rarely with
an R in the middle. Rarely have lost
significantly in crisis. Rather for fear of contagion, they ended up being
protected by the government. Almost certainly, TBTF, too big to fail is central to the debate about
financial crisis because financial crises are so destructive
of the real economy. It is also because
the amounts involved when the central bank
or the government intervenes in a financial
crisis are extremely large. Even though the final
cost of the government, including the central bank, are typically much smaller, and in some cases, governments and central banks even come out slightly ahead
after the crisis is over and the banks have been sold
back to the private sector. Another fact, it may be
that the departing heads of some failed banks or banks that needed massive government
assistance to survive, an analyst received very
large retirement packages. There's general public
anger to banks, and that public anger is reflected in the
way the Congress relates to this issue
of too big to fail. Now there are a
lot of managers in the regulatory reform program, which I won't go into
because of lack of time, but they're in the paper which is on the Fed website now. There are a lot of
measures designed to make the large banks safer of which the most important is that there are surcharges
for global suffice and for domestic suffice. There is also for these structurally important
financial institutions. Work on resolution mechanisms
in the living will every SIFIs required to
produce a living will, which will explain how
it will be treated if it goes broke, how it plans to handle
its bankruptcy. This is probably an
unpleasant exercise, but we all write wills
and maybe they can too. These exercises I think
probably contribute to helping deal with the
problem of the largest banks. Well, there is another thing. Why don't we break them up? If you talk to people, they'll tell you all about
Standard Oil repeatedly. They'll tell you about
the airlines often. They'll tell you about AT&T. Well, so you could say, well what about simply
breaking them up? There's nothing
simple in this area. It's not simply
breaking them up. This would be a heck of a mess. You break up the
biggest 10 banks. Do you break up the biggest and start there and keep going? Well, this could be a
very complicated system and we don't actually have
a whole lot of evidence that there'd be fewer crises if there were more banks,
but smaller banks. You can look around. Lehman Brothers was
not a very large bank, was not small, but
it was not huge. Wasn't a bank either, but it was not a very large
financial institution. The savings and loan crisis
of the 1980s and 1990s were a lot of things
called banks went broke. They were not big,
but the government intervened in those crises. There is another phrase floating around which is called
too many to fail. Well, too many to fail means institutions
with lots of systems, with lots of small
banks are a problem. Institutions with a few
big banks are a problem, too big to fail. This is a problem, but the
fact is financial panics can be caused by hurting
and by contagion, as well as by big banks
getting into trouble. My view is that actively
breaking up the largest banks would be a very complex task
with an uncertain payoff. What are the bottom lines? I give you a list. The first on capital
and liquidity. By raising capital
and liquidity ratios for the large banks and through the active
use of stress tests, regulators and supervisors
have strengthened bank holding companies and thus reduce the probability
of future bank failures. The paper contains some
details on the use of the resolution mechanisms set
out in the Dodd-Frank Act, which make it possible
to resolve a bank that is in essence treat it as you would treat
a bankrupt bank without following the
standard bankruptcy laws and those mechanisms hold-out some promise of
making it possible to resolve banks
in difficulty at no direct cost to the taxpayer. In any case, at a lower cost
than was possible hitherto. But work in this area
is less advanced than the work on raising
capital and liquidity ratios. The agreement was
reached very quickly on how to deal with global
in significant banks as systemically important banks and financial institutions. How to deal with
the bankruptcies. But there's been
much less agreement on that and there
are difficulties in reaching that agreement. There's work to be done there. On macroprudential, we need more research
and more confidence. Unlearning which measures work and which measures don't. In the same area, it's important to ensure
that coordination among different regulators of the financial system
is effective. We'll be effective in
the event of a crisis. On too big to fail. There's a lot of
progress being made. I'm sometimes asked, have we put an end
too big to fail? Well, my attitude to that is
we will never know except when we know that we haven't. Because you can go for 40 years as the United States did
without a big bank failing. It doesn't mean that it
won't happen in the future. I would say that we should never allow ourselves to
be so complacent as to believe that we've put
an end to too big to fail because if that's what we think, we want, supervise with the
right degree of caution. We should recognize that
somebody imperfection that despite some imperfections. This is something on
which I've changed my mind despite
some imperfections. The Dodd-Frank Act is
a major achievement from a distance it
looked like a big mess. Well, as part of my new job, I actually had to
read the thing. Well, it's still
pretty complicated. But it contains a lot of
very useful legislation, much of which will help
stabilize the system, some of which is
more complicated. Well, having said all that, I'm coming to the end. We need always to be aware that the next crisis and
there will be a crisis, will not be identical
to the last one. That we need to be vigilant, both in trying to foresee
the future crises and in trying to prevent them and in not thinking that
what we're doing now, will deal with all future crises and since somebody would ask me, "Well, what do you think is going to be the source
of the next crisis?" My guess is that we have made at least progress on how to deal with the shadow banking system and that we're
going to have to do a lot more work there. If despite all our
efforts, a crisis happens, we had better be willing and
prepared to deal with it. Thank you very much. 