Motohiro Yogo: This
paper was motivated by a set of questions that we're interested in related
to the role of institutions and asset markets. For example, we often like what last paper and the
literature that institutions are becoming more important over the years as a share of the
market that they manage. How has that affected the
liquidity of asset markets? There's been a lot
of QE activity going on throughout the world right now on the Euro
program is on the forefront. How does QE affect liquidity and volatility in asset markets? Should large institutions
like black been fidelity be, doesn't mean a
systemically important and should we regulate
them as such? That was a question
that was raised by the OFR report in 2013. The purpose of this
paper is to develop a framework to answer
these types of questions. It builds nicely on the last
paper that we just saw. The question is, we think about institutions, and we have lots of data about
institutions now. Like Django woman has a
nice work using 13 of data. How do we use data pretty enough for bond holdings
are in the Euros. We have a data on institutional
holdings from the ECB. How do we use such data to do
equilibrium asset pricing. Our contributions are to develop a new demand system
for financial assets. That's where we're
going to think about institutional demand for assets as a function of
prices and characteristics. Very much in a spirit of what Fama-French have
done over the years, but trying to merge it
with holdings state, I'm trying to do estimate
demand function. Our frameworks can
emerge institutional holdings exactly. We're going to see that there's going to be a lot of
heterogeneity and demand across institutions
that you wouldn't see if you aggregate them into
one being institution. Our frameworks can be consistent with traditional asset pricing, with either heterogeneous
beliefs or constraint. We're going to try to
identify a demand system by IV or coefficient
restrictions. I'm going to show you
some applications of our framework towards
the end of this talk. To jump right into the model, the framework we're thinking
about is we're going to model each institution as having a portfolio
choice problem where there are allocating
across different assets. Suppose there's N
different assets in the economy and each
institution i is going to allocate across a subset of those assets that they're
going to be intensive on. Each investor i's demand for asset N is going to be
given by logit function, where this function is a convenient functional form where there's going to be
adding up constraints. The portfolio shares add up
to one is what you want. Moreover, the shares are
going to be positive. The positive restriction
is not necessary. We can have functions
that add up to one but can take
on negative values. But the reason will logit
function isn't enough data. We don't observe short position. We wanted a functional from
that is strictly positive, that's not critical
in our framework. But what's important is
that we're going to model this demand function
as a function of prices and characteristics. Here's the log price. Here are all characteristics that could be things
like dividends, earnings, book equity assets. You can throw in your favorite
characteristics here. An Epsilon is what we
call latent demand. This is the unobserved demand of institution i first asked. Then the other equation that we have in our model
is just market-clearing. If you aggregate demand
across all institutions, they have to add up to shares
outstanding times price. This is market
clearing in dollars. Price per share times shares
outstanding is equal to the dollar value of stock or asset N aggregated
across all institutions. Now, it turns out that
our demand system has a unique equilibrium as long as the coefficient on
price is less than one, which is equivalent
economically just saying that demand functions are
strictly downward sloping. I'm going to show you
that our framework is consistent with traditional asset pricing, and portfolio choice where
heterogeneity and demands. The portfolio separation
theorem to essentially fail. We need something like
heterogeneous price constraints. The fact that we're studying
institutions suggests that these investors
could be strategic. They're not going to take prices given some want to explicitly built into our framework,
potential price impact. It turns out that assumption of a factor structure and
returns is critical to going from standard
mean-variance demands to a characteristics
demand as you'll see. The way we traditionally
do asset pricing is we start with an
objective function. In this case, we're maximizing expected log utility over
our terminal wealth at time t. The choice problem is you're choosing a vector
of portfolio shares. Now the standard
budget constraint is your wealth, and the future is your wealth today
times the rate of return in your portfolio. Where r is the vector
of gross returns and w is a vector of
weights on those returns. Then zero just indicates
the risk-free asset. We know very well from
standard portfolio theory that the optimal portfolio is going to be a
mean-variance portfolio. Sigma inverse, the inverse of the covariance
matrix or returns, Mu is the vector of
expected returns. But here I noticed that index expected returns by
i because this is a model with
heterogeneous beliefs who each institution could have different beliefs about returns. Now, you notice that
with log utility. It's just gonna be
Sigma inverse Mu, but I have this extra
term in the denominator. It looks like risk aversion. The reason that happens is if investors are large, and they
care about price and pop, there effectively going to
be having risk aversion. It turns out that this term, constant c is going to be 1
plus A is how big you are your assets under
management divided by a weighted sum of asset
center management, of all the other investors. To find large relative
to other investors, it's effectively like
converse more risk averse. My demand curves are going
to be more downward sloping. But the special case of is when my assets go to
zeros, atomistic, that's the the classic asset
pricing paradigm which investors are priced taking than this constant
just becomes one, which is a standard
mean variance. Now how do I go from
mean-variance to a characteristics
peak demand function? The key assumption that does all the work is this
assumption which is assume that a
covariance matrix has a factor structure where
covariance matrix is given by vector Pi inverse plus scalar
times the identity matrix. This is like saying,
like in the CAP-M world, this is just going
be a vector Betas, and a little Pi is going to
be idiosyncratic volatility. Now, moreover, I'm
going to assume that expected returns, and these factor loadings
are going to be linear and prices
in characteristics. This is like the linear version, or like Fama-French were expected returns
and factor loadings are just functions or characteristics like
book-to-market size, and so on. This assumption, it turns
out to be very powerful because with some
math can show that the demand function is
going to be a function of prices and characteristics plus what I call latent demand, which is the individual
specific deviation from at the part of expected returns that
depend on characteristics. Think of it as unobserved characteristics
to the econometrician. This vector Beta is going to be a function
of Phi and Psi. Phi is the vector
that determines how characteristics
impact expected returns. Psi is a vector
that determines how factor loaning's depend
on characteristics. Beta is a linear combination
of this Phi and Psi. Economically, what
does this say? Well, it's not the case
that when we invest, it sounds like we care about
characteristics directly. We care about characteristics
to the extent that either forecast expected
returns are factor loadings. This demand function
saying that I liked assets whose characteristics
are associated either high expected returns
or low factor loadings, which is exactly what you
would think intuitively. Ultimately, what we derive is a demand function
where you're from mean-variance to a
characteristics based model. Once we have this
model, we know we can do equilibrium asset pricing. The data we're using is
a dataset where since 1980 we have the
quarterly stock holdings of all the institutions that are managing over a 100 million. This is merged with the standard Chris Compustat database and we end up with 44
million observations, which is the number of assets times the number of quarters years times
essentially the number of holdings per institution. This is like an example,
like big data on economics as applied to finance. There's nothing much
bigger deal than we typically use in finance where we
only look at prices and characteristics. Now the key facts is as a
share of the US market, institutions used to
manage about 35 percent, which has expanded to 63 percent at the end of our sample. In 2014, the leading
institution manage about 300 million and
held about 69 stocks. To give you an idea
like a cross-section of stocks like 3,000-4,000. These guys hold very
concentrated portfolios. Empirical specification
is if we take our demand function and then
work in logarithms then log demand for stock n or
asset n is a function of log price log or characteristics and
latent demand Epsilon. This almost looks like a
linear regression model that almost invites you to
just estimate this thing. What we're trying to identify is it a demand system and this is for single institution from a cross-section of
stocks they hold. But you can do this for
each institution i. Different institutions
are going to have different preferences for characteristics versus
price elasticities. The characteristics
that we throw in here are things
like log dividends, log book equity, profitability. But you can presumably put
in anything you want here. We estimate these
coefficients for each 13 of institution at
each point in time. It's a large exercise and parallel computing where we
have 3,000 institutions, and you do that at
each point in time. Now you have the
whole demand system for the entire US stock market. With the whole entire
demand system, you can start to do some
interesting applications. Now before I go there, let me explain to
you how we identify just immune system. As I mentioned already, suppose you do this by OLS then the concern is
that the latent demand, a part of demand on observed to the econometricians potentially
correlate with braces. The reason being
that if I enlarge, and I demand share n, I could push up the
price of sharing, so epsilon and prices are
going to be correlated. One way get around this problem is we can put restrictions
on the demand system that gives you over-identify and restrictions, and allows you to ultimately estimators
with weaker assumptions. One reasonable assumption
is that something like we care about prices
per share directly, we care about
prices and relation to characteristics like
dividends per share. Suppose the demand
system only depends on the price to the
dividend ratio. Then essentially that gives you a one coefficient
restricts you want just the coefficient on log price and log dividends have to be opposite and equal. You get rid of one coefficient, then you can get
rid of price from the moment condition,
and estimate this by restrictedly squares. This log dividends
isn't anything specially you can do it
with any characteristics. We can do it with
log book equity per share or cash flow per share. But more generally, you can put in the coefficient
restriction would be price. Together with a bunch
of characteristics, their coefficients have
to sum up to zero. Which is like saying
valuation ratios are what matters in demand. A different assumption is an IV assumption
where this comes from the index addition
deletion literature like a Shleifer E6. Where you assume that investors have an exogenous
investment universe. Think about this as like pension funds can
only invest in a set of stocks, and they tried to
decide between those stock. Suppose the investment universe of investors outside my group. Let's say if I'm an
insurance company, I don't care directly
about to investment universe mutual funds
and hedge funds. Suppose you can take
that as exogenous, then you can rewrite
market-clearing price times shares outstanding is somewhat
demands across all investors where I grouped
investors into investors that are similar to me and ones that are
dissimilar to me. Among those are dissimilar I break it up into the
intensive margin, how allocate within the
investment universe versus I allocate within the
investment universe. Take the part that's exogenous and clear markets with
that part of demand. This gives me an
instrument for price. This is the counterfactual. Suppose like an
insurance company, and there's other institutions at whose demands I don't
directly care about. But the fact that they are in some asset markets
pushes up the price. That's going to be
an instrument for my price when I estimate
my demand function. To give you an idea of how least squares gives you a very different
estimate for IV, for each institution
in each point in time. This dot represents
their coefficient on price estimated by least
squares versus IV. IV and OLS gives you
the same estimates, then all the points should
line up along the 45. But notice all the points
are actually above the 45, which suggests that least
squares OLS gives you a positive bias
relative to an IV. This is exactly what you would expect in the presence
of price impact, is that prices and demands are going to be
positively correlated. That gives you a positive
bias if you asked me this by OLS versus IV. Now the coefficient
restriction in an IV give you very
similar estimates. Notice these line
up along the 45. Now we have an entire
demand system. We can estimate liquidity. Liquidity measure
that's often used in a microstructure
literature is like an estimate of what's
called cows Lambda, which is in our framework, how prices vary with
investor price demands. This figure summarizes
our estimates of price impact for the
average institution, and this line is
the median stock. When the average
institution treated the median stock back in 1980, price elasticity of 0.02, which means if I increase
my demand by 10 percent, then I move prices
by 20 basis points. These are the least
liquid stocks in the cross-section and
these are the most liquid. I said the most liquid stocks
have always been liquid. It can treat those with
very little price impact. But the least liquid stocks, there used to be a
lot of price impact to trade these stocks. But notice that
this distribution has collapsed over time. In other words, even
the least liquid stocks are a lot more liquid now
than they used to be. You notice this big trend. Now you also noticed
a cycle here. Price impact went up during
the crash of the.combubble, this mark has become
less liquid here. You notice the financial crisis here in markets
become less liquid. There are cycles
in liquidity and also this trend in liquidity. You can also use our frame which are decomposed the variance of stock returns into
like supply factors, actually demand factors. Our model says that
prices are entirely determined by shares
outstanding characteristics, assets under management, these coefficients
on characteristics, preferences for characteristics
and this latent demand. Using the definition
of log returns, we can see when prices move, then is it caused by
characteristics changing? They can [inaudible] about earnings and
profitability and so on? Or is it coming from
institutions trading for reasons that are orthogonal
to these characteristics? When we implement a
variance decomposition in the cross-section, two percent of the cross-sectional variants
and stock returns is explained by changes in shares outstanding
from year to year, six percent by characteristics, 14 percent by changes in
assets under management. This is like saying
when assets move from BlackRock to like
hedge funds and so on, how much is that contributing to volatility of stock returns? That's 14 percent. But ultimately 74 percent of the variance in stock returns is explained by ligand demand. This is like institutions
training for reasons that are orthogonal to
characteristics that are in our specification. Finally, we use a framework
to predict stock returns. Think about using our
demand system to create a trading strategy in
the cross-section. One trading strategy is that, they're going to be stocks where institutions demand a lot. Those are going to be half
currently high prices as demand is going
to mean revert. You expect low returns. On the opposite side
stocks institutions like have low Epsilon or low latent demand
or low demand on, as demand mean reverts,
prices are going to go up. Those stocks are going
to have high returns. This is like a large
sample version like some stuff we've seen in the mutual fund
literature like so, for example, the Coval Stafford
mutual fund fire-sale. If you can forecast changes
and institutional holdings, you can try to create a
strategy that exploits that. But this is like doing it
for the entire universe. During our sample 1982-2014, an equal-weighted
strategy that exploits this mean reversion and
institutional demand generates a 17 percent annual return and valuated it's six percent. Predominantly there
is mean reversion in institutional demand. You can exploit mostly
on smaller stocks. Because for larger stocks, the fact that demand mean
reverts is not going to affect their price
movements as much. The goal of this paper is like, instead of taking the 13
of data as one big fun, we want to go the opposite. He started analyzing
each sector at a time. Mutual funds, hedge funds, pension funds,
insurance companies, they are very different
institutions. Even within those classes are different size institutions have very different strategies. That implies that
the asset demand of these different institutions
are going to be very heterogeneous and rich. We want to respect
that heterogeneity. I do asset pricing by aggregating those very
heterogeneous demand functions. Ultimately, we're interested in this framework because
it can answer questions are very difficult with reduced form regression
or events studies. One of our ongoing projects that developed out
of this paper as the ECB has amazing data on institutional holdings
all across the Euro zone. We can see in real time, as the ECB does QE, which institutions
are selling to QE, and which assets are
these substituting into and we can
estimate the impact of QE not only on risk-taking and institutional asset space, but also the price impact in different securities markets. Like some work that
Ralph and I have done on insurance companies is
also longest framework. If you regulate
insurance companies, systemically in institutions, how does it affect
corporate bond markets where they are the
largest players? 