Steve Goss: Factors will
more matter most for the future and how are they going to
differ from the past? What we always try to look
at very clearly is not just past average rates of change in anything or
past average experience. We try to look very carefully at what the conditions that were underlying to the trends
and changes in the past. Then we have to imagine what the conditions will be
in the future in order to have the best
possible assumption about what's going to be
happening in the future. We know a number of things are going to be happening
that are going to affect the nature
of the labor force that will be involved
in determining what the output and what the productivity levels are going to be in the population. Very much, remember,
the change in age distribution of
the adult population, increased educational
levels of attainment. We've been seeing that,
and the implications of this for the
domestic supply of workers and the demands for goods and services is
going to be substantial. Things will be
changing the future, all of which will have an
effect on productivity, that is output per hour worked, on average on our society. Post-industrial, are we going to be really
moving towards more and more close to industrial so that
increased innovation and automation and production is going to be more and
more of a factor? There's big questions about infrastructure and
replacement of infrastructure in the future. We've done relatively
little of that in recent decades and will
there be an increase in that, which would move
us back some more towards physical
goods production? Technology. Another
question here is will the US really be leading in the development of
alternative energy? Are we going to really be moving more and more
away from fossil fuels, having more development
of alternatives? Also, bio technology,
genetic-based medicine. Lots of discussion
for many years now. mRNA for COVID has been a great advance and may have some other
positives for us, but are we going to have
more of that in the future, and what will that
do both in terms of the direct effects on productivity and the work
that is done in the economy, but also the effect on the
quality of the labor force? Will it be a plus or a minus? Services, in the past obviously we know that
relative to goods production, they are not registering as highly in terms of
labor productivity. So what will be
happening in the future about services versus
goods production? Of course, aging of a population has a big effect on that. Future of health care. One of the thing we know that in some of the countries
like Japan, robotics have been more
and more brought into play with big change
in age distributions. Will that be the case more
and more in this country, and what will the effect
on productivity be there? On the next slide, we do have issues with
measuring real growth, and I know there was a
Brookings' discussion back about five years ago, pre-pandemic, about
just this news. A lot of discussion about
the difficulty of actually measuring real growth for
the purpose of productivity, hedonics, quality
adjustment, etc. What are the
difficulties on this? Really what was pointed out was, for instance, smartphones. Smartphones had, at that
point, even five years ago, been increasingly doing
more and more things for us and were we, in fact, really quality adjusting
the price levels of smartphones to give ample credit for the
increasing value of smartphones relative
to the price, i.e. productivity. It is not clear. There was a much
thought by folks at that council that we're
not really doing that. The bottom line in the way this translates
into real earnings is critical to the
standard of living, but more specifically for
so security projections. The wage growth versus price
growth is really critical. Real growth and earnings and
productivity really matter. Everybody, I'm sure, is
very familiar with the fact that our revenue coming in, based on payroll
taxes on earnings, rise directly with
wage growth over time but after somebody first
becomes eligible for benefits, their benefits go
up only by prices. The degree of positive
real productivity in wage growth is really
an important factor. Just a couple things, by way of thinking
about all of this, that we want to offer, that
are much in our minds. This being the ratio of
employment of population, a remarkable thing here is the dramatic and rapid increase back in the racial of
employment to population. This is an age-sex adjusted basis after the most
recent 2020 recession, as compared to the much
more gradual increase we had after the last recession. Speaking to the changing age distribution
of the population, you can see this graph that we have used many times here. You can see between
1970 and 1990, the shrinking share of the
working age population, between 25 and 64, that was between 45 and 64. Those were good times
for disability benefits. You can see them what happened
between 1990 and 2010, not a big sporadic
disability benefits began to rise relative to earnings as the
45-60 divorce share of working age became
bigger and bigger. In the future, the
big change is going to be that for the
adult population, more and more are
going to be over 65, relatively less as workers
and more as consumers, and that will change
the pattern of demand. Another factor is the
employment over 65. You can see on this
interesting set of graphs, men on the left and
women on the right. You can see that the
greatest increase in unemployment rates
have been over 60, and especially over 65, much less so under
59 and under 54. That appears to be a continuing
factor into the future. Wealthy, old comment from Paul Samuelson that the best retirement approach is a job. Another factor that has
really been changing is the nature of employment. We can see between 2010 and 2019 in particular, pre-pandemic, that we had dramatic shifts in the distribution
of the workforce by the type of occupation. This again is not
by the employer, but by the actual occupation. Much more shift towards the kind of work
that most of us do, management, business, financial, professional and related, and much less growth in
areas that are probably more subject to lower income and higher possibility
of disability as per the last presentations. Another factor of course then, which is going to play
into given productivity. What's going to happen
in earnings levels is labor share of GDP. We can see that labor
share of GDP has been lower recently and
has been trending down. We are projecting that it, having come up in
the 2020 recession, but dropping
somewhat since then, and the most recent 2022 Trustees Report that it
will be coming back up to about 63 percent less than it used to be back in
the 1970s and before, but this is, of course, it'd be a major factor
in translating from productivity into
earnings levels. One of the factor
related to cyclicality is the observed notion that
when we have a recession, especially a bad recession, we tend to lose not
only temporarily, but maybe permanently
something in terms of the level of GDP
and productivity. We have a downward level shift. You can see what we had back in the 2010 Trustees Report, just before the great recession of 2007-2009 being reflected. We had a trend projection
up in potential GDP but by the 2020, '21 and '22 Trustees Reports, we were operating at substantially levels
of potential GDP. This is really because of lower realized
productivity, largely. You can see for the
2021 Trustees Report, we assumed a little
extra drop-off from the most recent recession, but we pulled back on that given a very dramatic strength of recovery to this point that we've had since
the 2020 recession. Interesting other
point, relative to just the employment
to population, much observed is that we recoiled a little bit against the discussion of the
great resignation, and think it's a little
bit more in recent times as a great churning of jobs. You can see the ball, the employment to population
ratio dropped in recession, but it's come back strongly. The quits rate, that is
the voluntary quits rate, leaving a job that is
indicated by the Fed, has moved up to
dramatically high levels in absolute terms and especially in relation to the
employment to population. It's just another indication of the very strong demand
for jobs now relative to the number of labor force
that are ready to go, and so we will see how
this goes in the future. Will this be persistent or not? On labor productivity
growth, in particular, this is just another
illustration of how backed off
through the 1970s, we had somewhat higher
levels in general, but we have had lower levels. The little dashed
black line shows you what the 20-year
moving average is, and that has been
meandering around. This is by the way,
total economy, labor productivity,
that is indicated here. You can see the 20-year average has actually trended down more towards about 1.5 percent. We're assuming about
a 1.63 percent ultimate in the future. The question is, will
we get back up to that, will we be lower or will we rise back up to the
level of the 1970s? Finally, we have a table here, not all of which we will try to absorb here in
the short amount of time but doing it indicate,
I don't know whether the little arrow on my
mouse cursor is showing up, but we would probably put
our most emphasis here on the non-farm business sector, which is where we see most of the attention paid by
private forecasters. You can see over the
last 25 years and over the last 65 years for
non-farm business sector, we have been at
about two percent average annual rate of growth. That is actually, if you look down to the bottom
of that column, that is what we are assuming
the 2022 Trustees Report, and have for quite a while, as the rate of growth for the
non-farm business sector. That's where we're
at at this point. The question is, is that our most appropriate
assumption for the future? Again, very close to
what we've had over the past 25-65 years. Where are we
actually going to be open to deal with all
the changes that have happened in the composition of our labor force and
jobs. Future course. Will ultimate total growth in total economy labor
productivity average about the 1.63 percent that we have been assuming in
our Trustees Report? Similarly, for the ultimate growth rate and non-pharm business productivity continue to be at around
the two percent that we've observed over
longer periods or should we expect
the possibility of better or worse than that? Those are really the questions
we're happy to pose. Jones, again, thank
you so much for the opportunity to come and
make this presentation. We really appreciate it. It's super helpful to be able to join with you all on this. Chad Jones: Thanks very
much. I wanted to start just with a quick reminder of how growth economists think about the sources of growth and go back to Paul Romer's key insight responsible for his Nobel Prize. Romer said, it's really
important to separate the things in the economy
into objects versus ideas. Objects are everything
we study in economics. Everything that underlies
Adam Smith's invisible hand. If thinking about a computer is a classic example
of an object, if you add one computer
to the economy, you make one worker
more productive. If you want to make a million
workers more productive, that same way you need
a million computers. This underlies our typical solo-style production function that output per worker depends on the number of
computers per worker and that's underlying all these
productivity calculations. Romer pointed out that
ideas are different. In particular, ideas
are non-rival, or I like to call it
infinitely usable. If you add one computer
in the economy, you make one worker
more productive. If you add one new idea though, because those ideas
are infinitely usable, they can make an
unlimited number of people more productive
or better off. Think about a cure
for lung cancer or drought-resistant seeds
or spreadsheet or just the COVID vaccine
is the classic example. You invent it once and then potentially seven or
eight billion people can benefit from that technology. What this means is
that income per person depends on the
aggregate stock of knowledge, not on the number of
ideas per person. With capital or with any object, that's objects per person but because the ideas
are infinitely usable, income per person depends on the aggregate stock
of knowledge. What's important
about that is that it's easy to make
aggregates grow. Solo taught us you can get aggregate growth through
population growth. That's going to link to some of the things I'm
going to say later. In these idea-driven
growth models, population growth
plays a key role because more people
means more ideas, just like more auto workers
means you make more cars. There's nothing special in this view about the idea
of production function. People means more ideas, but because those ideas
are infinitely usable, more ideas means higher
income per person. More people is tied to
income per person through this non-rivalry of ideas. With this framework, I did a back-of-the-envelope
growth accounting from the 1950s to today. If you think about
GDP per person growth averaging around two percent
per year over this period, where does it come from? Then I'm going to do it a little bit differently from
the way it's usually done. I'm going to talk about
the capital-output ratio, it hasn't grown at all. Zero percent of our growth comes from the capital-output
ratio over this period. Human capital per
person, namely here, measured by educational
attainment, is a big part of
what's been going on. Claudia Goldin and Larry Katz have this beautiful
work looking at a century of growth in educational attainment
and put it out, but basically, over this period, the adult labor force has added about a year of
education every decade. Labor economists tell us
that each year adds about, say, five, six or seven
percent to your wage. Each decade we're
adding five percent to the wages of people in the US economy through rising
educational attainment. Well, if each decade we're
adding five percent, each year we're adding
half a percent. About half a percent per year of this two percent growth. A quarter of our
growth is due to rising educational
attainment historically. Rising employment
population ratio, especially with female
labor force participation, is another important part here, about 0.2 percentage points. That leaves the residual of TFP growth as 1.3
percentage points. This may be a little higher than you're used to seeing
because I'm doing it in labor augmenting units rather than the hicks neutral units. That way you can
think about what the long-run growth rate would be. If you then use an idea
model to break out, where does the 1.3 percentage points of
TFP growth come from? You get some interesting things. The first thing to say is
this misallocation term. I made up this number of
0.3 percentage points based on this work that I did with
[inaudible] and Erik Hurst, we looked at the
allocation of talent and the Sandra Day O'Connor, Jennifer [inaudible]
point that women are increasingly being allocated to jobs where they're
comparative advantage lies. That's an improvement
in the allocation of talent and has raised
productivity growth. In that paper, we estimated
about 0.3 percentage points. There are other sources
of misallocation, this is just one of them. That leaves one percentage point of productivity growth to be due to increases
in research effort. When you break the
research effort into research intensity, like the fraction
of the labor force engaged in research, versus just population growth, you get about a
two-to-one split here. It turns out that of this
last one percentage point, about 0.3 percentage points is due to population growth and 0.7 percentage points is due to rising
research intensity. Now what's interesting
about that is the quick description
of the model I gave you in the long run, all of these things disappear except this contribution
from population growth. At least the way I've set it up, your educational attainment is not going to keep
rising forever. Certainly, the fraction of
your lifetime you spend in school is bounded. The employment-population
ratio is bounded. In the long run,
in this framework, all of growth is due to this population growth component but interestingly, even
in that framework, historically, more
than 80 percent of growth is due to
these other factors. Now, what's interesting about
that, as I pointed out, is that these other
factors are transitory. Rising educational
attainment, rising labor force participation,
declining misallocation, rising research intensity;
in the long run, those things can't contribute to growth because
they are bounded. The long-run component of
growth in this accounting is really just the 0.3
percentage points, much smaller than the
two percentage points we've seen for more
than 100 years. The application is,
unless something changes, growth has to slow down
quite considerably someday. How soon as someday is
an interesting question. I wanted to structure the
rest of my comments about why future growth might
be slower and then why it might not be slower and what some uncertainties are. The first reason why
it might be slower is this growth accounting
I just presented. A second reason is our idea is getting
increasingly hard to find. In a particular set of numbers that Steve
just showed us, per capita GDP growth, productivity growth.
These things have slowed down a lot in
the last two decades. 2003-2018 before the pandemic, instead of two percent
growth in GDP per person, we were almost half of that. Then the next three
points I want to make, I have some slides for us, let me turn to those, but other sources
have slowed down. I mentioned that
rising research effort in these idea models.
Where do you get growth? You get it from throwing researchers at
these problems and the growth rate if the
research effort is really the key source
of long-run growth. Well, if you look at the
growth rate of research effort around the world,
it's slowed down. The world numbers
slows a little bit, the OECD numbers slows
quite a bit more, and the US number slows
quite a bit as well. Maybe it's slowed by about
a factor of a third. We're not throwing resources at these problems the
same way we were in the past and maybe that's related to the slower
growth we're seeing. Another interesting point. Here's what fraction
of investment is in these infinitely
usable things, the intellectual
property products. This is broken down into
software entertainment, which I don't want to
emphasize today, and then R&D. The interesting thing
when you look at the R&D numbers that you're
probably all aware of is that the total amount of R&D in the US as a
share of GDP has been pretty stable around 2.8
or three percent per year, but the composition
has really shifted. It shifted away from government-funded R&D into
privately funded R&D. You might think, maybe
that's a good thing. Maybe the more the private
sector does, the better. On the other hand, if you
have a pipeline view of R&D, which is the government funds the basic research and
the private sector commercializes the
innovations that come from the basic research, you might be worried that somehow our pipeline
isn't what it used to be. I think it's an open question
how large that effect is but certainly, when
you look at the data, this thing jumps out at you. Another thing I
want to emphasize that I only appreciated recently is not only is
population growth slowing down, which everyone
knows, but in fact, it's slowing in a way that's stronger than
you might've thought. I would have guessed ten years ago that
global population was going to level off
at some number like 10 billion
people or something. I'm not so sure
that's true anymore. There's this nice book by Bricker and Ibbitson
called the Empty Planet. What it points out
is that all around the world fertility rates are falling and they just
shoot through two or 2.1. If you think the women
on average need to have 2.1 kids per woman in order to keep the
population stable, it turns out as
countries get rich, they just shoot right
through the two and go down to some numbers
like 1.3 or 1.4, or 1.7, which is what
you can see here. What's interesting is at
the microeconomic level, there's nothing special about
above two or below two, fertility falls
5,4,3,2 and less. There's nothing special
at the micro level but at the macro level, it's absolutely crucial because whether population stabilizes or grows or declines depends
on that in a critical way. Our standard growth models just assume positive
population growth. You get this view of the world that we get exponential
growth in incomes because of the ideas that these rising
number of people produce for an exponentially
growing population and that's a pretty nice
view of the world. On the other hand,
it turns out if population growth is negative, so the level of population
starts declining, you get a much more pessimistic
view of the future, which is living
standards stagnate, growth comes to an end, and the population vanishes. The fact that this is what
the data look like make me somewhat nervous about what the future of growth looks like, other things equal. Why might growth not
slow down so soon? I think the finding
last Einsteins is really an important point and it's got several dimensions. The way I think about is how
many Edisons and Doudnass, have we missed out on
historically for various reasons? One of those key reasons is the rise of China and India
and other emerging markets. China and India each have
as many people as the US, Europe, and Japan put
together more than a billion. In 1980, those
economies were too poor to be pushing
the global frontier forward but in the last 20, 30, 40 years, we've seen
economic growth take hold and increasingly those economies are producing innovations that push the global frontier forward. That's another two
billion people that we can potentially use to throw at these hard
idea problems. A student at Stanford,
John Felix Brouillette, pointed out that only
three percent of inventors were women
in 1976 and in 2016, that number is still
only 12 percent. Again, how many Jennifer
Downness are we missing out from this
misallocation of talent? Bell, Chetty, [inaudible] I'm missing someone
I'm sure point out the same thing applies
to poor talented people. There's all this
talent that we're not taking sufficient
advantage of. By improving the
allocation of talent, could we increase the
amount of research by a factor of three or seven? Plausible over the next century, how big of an effect on
growth would that have? It's actually surprisingly small I think when you look at it. A really key parameter in all these models is how large is the non-rivalry of ideas and how large is the increasing returns associated with that? I think some number like
a third is not crazy, although it's hard to know. In that case, this tripling the research effort
would only raise incomes in the long
run by 40 percent. A seven-fold increase in research effort would only raise incomes in the long
run by 90 percent. If you convert that to an annual growth rate for a century, you could raise growth
by three-tenths of a percent or six-tenths
of a percent maybe, but it's not a huge
change on the other hand. Another reason why
growth to be faster, this is completely speculative, is automation of
artificial intelligence. We're seeing this
in the last decade becoming increasingly important. I know you need to stop soon,
two more slides I think. In simple models,
automation can raise the growth rate or even lead
to some explosive growth. What if machines can produce ideas and we don't need people? Importantly, we've
had centuries of automation and they
haven't sped up growth. I think probably those simple
models are too optimistic, although there's lots of interesting work
to be done there. Uncertainty, long
and variable lags. You look at the
breakthrough patents. The 1950s and 60s were the
best decades for growth in the 20th century and they don't stand out as being
special from patents. In fact, the 1930s was the best decade for
innovation up until recently. I think this long and
variable a lot of view is really important. Uncertainties about the shape of the future idea
production function. I think if you look at the past, a view that ideas are getting harder to find and
they've always been getting harder to find is the right view of the past, but there's no reason the past has to be a good
guide to the future. In the interest of time
I won't go through these scenarios and why
they make sense or not, but the future
could be different. Maybe we're going to
invent some great new idea that's going
to cause things to take off or maybe we're
going to run out of ideas. It's hard to know. Just to conclude, this is my favorite picture in
all the economics. You can see the two
percent growth for the 150 years in GDP per person. That always makes me a
little skittish and saying, well, growth can slow
down or speed up. For 150 years, it's been pretty close to two. At some level, two is
not a crazy bet to make. On the other hand,
there's nothing in the economics that says
two is a law of nature. When you look at it, I
think the preponderance of the evidence suggests slowing down is maybe more
likely than speeding up. I think Steven, in terms
of the numbers you showed, if I were looking
at total economy, labor productivity, I think
the main thing I would do that is important it's just
consider some heterogeneity. I think there really is
a lot of uncertainty. It's not crazy to think
growth can slow down to one percent per year
over the next 25 years. That's what we've seen
in the last 15 years. On the other hand, artificial
intelligence machines, biotech could raise growth 2.3. Even 2.3 seems
really high to me. If you took the average
of these and got 1.6, that might be okay. I guess my bias would say it's more likely to be
lower rather than higher. I would put more weight on the slightly lower numbers
than the high numbers, but anyway, that's what I have to
say. Thank you very much. Francine Blau: Well,
I'm delighted to have the opportunity to talk to you all and
actually listen to these two fascinating
presentations. I'm going to take a little
bit of a different tech. I will circle back to more
explicit productivity issues but what I'd like
to do is focus on the relationship between gender and social security
contributions. As you know, earnings are what contributions
are based on, and that has two components both of which can
differ by gender, labor supply where labor
force participation is a big factor and we talked about that in previous presentations. Labor force attachment at a point in time and
over the life cycle, and wages which are
hourly earnings, and they have the
closest relationship to the theme productivity, and all that can
differ by gender. I'm going to talk about
that historically, and also, where we may be
going though I wouldn't try to match the precision
that statement as colleagues need to pop. Then labor spine earnings as wages determine earnings. I'll just look explicitly
what we know from the past about earnings and
the earnings cap. Then I just want to briefly
mention issue that's unique to considering gender
and hasn't come up yet but the gender issues can influence the relationship between contributions
and benefits. What I have in mind here are spousal or
dependent benefits. Some individuals who
don't have any earnings do receive benefits
based on their spouse, and those individuals are
disproportionately women. Further, again,
disproportionately women who have relatively
low wages and intermittent participation
can actually do better even though they've made some contributions
collecting their spousal benefits, and that's called
dual entitlement. What happens over time is as women's labor supply
and wages increase, they move out of
these categories and into individuals whose benefits are solely dependent on
their own contributions. I'll say a few words about that. Then mention future trends, and I want to point
out that trends which hasn't come
up too much yet, are dependent on policy, and I'm not talking about
social security policy. In this case, I'm talking
about policies that could influence women's labor
supply and women's wages. Let's start with labor supply. This picture, I was
asked long-run trends. This is very long run from
1947 to roughly the present, and it's the labor force
participation rate of the working age
population back in the 40s that was 14
years of age and over, it's now 16 years
of age and over. What you see here is story that we're all very
familiar with have been enormous
consistent growth in female labor force participation that played an important
role in overall growth, but starting in the mid 1990s, this plateaued and
flattened out. We're now entering after 50 years of growth in
female participation, we're now entering two
decades of plateauing. I would downgrade any idea that there's an
actual reduction. Yes, there's been a bit
of a decrease for women, but note that it very much
matches the pattern of the decreased for men
over the great recession, over certain shifts and the age distribution
and over the pandemic. Now why has this
flattening occurred? There's no consensus on
what the explanation is but there is a strong view that policy is potentially
important in this, especially the role of
work-family policy. Some work I did with
Blau and Kahn in 2013, we pointed out that
the United States since 1990 has gone from
one of the leaders in women's labor force
participation among the OECD countries to one of the lowest
participation rates. Indeed, countries
that had much lower participation rates a
number of decades ago have not only caught up to us
but have surpassed us. In our econometric analysis that suggested that
work-family policy played an important role here but let me just back up and say what this means is we haven't necessarily hit a
ceiling that we can't push beyond because
many other countries have. The difference is partly, what we found was
important was there are much more generous
parental leave policies than United States, just to match in the
United States as 12 weeks of unpaid leave. We found over a year of pay leave was the average
for the other countries. The generosity increase since the 90s has played a role in those
countries surpassing us. Now, one issue I'd like to return to is for parental leave, the relationship
between participation which certainly has
a positive effect, and wage differentials
is a little complicated and very long
parental leave policies can adversely affect
relative wages and productivity of those
in the labor force. Olivetti and Petrongolo point to the important role of childcare, which, let me say is actually in a crisis right now in
the United States with rising cost and lowered supplies of workers as also
being important. Another issue is how much these contributions are
over the life cycle. In some work I've done
with Kahn, Boboshko, and Comey, I've taken
these figures from there and looking
first at all workers. These are gender gaps in full-time work experience,
past work experience. You see that those gaps have
fallen markedly over time, both for all workers and even in the full population
that includes those currently out
of the labor force, from six and half years in 1981 to just about a year in 2015. Now, this is important for contributions
to social security, but it is also important for the productivity discussion. Work experience is one of the two major human
capital variables that we emphasize
in analyzing wages. The decline in these gaps are an indicator of the rising
productivity of women. Of course, the other major
indicator is education. There, back in 1981, men were slightly better
educated than women. Now, women have
actually surpassed men, not just in the United States, but in most of the
developed world. Women have really enhanced their human capital
and that has shown up in their wages and we've seen steady increases in the
relative wages of women. A big non-trivial
issue here is that, and these are wage ratios, female to male wage ratios, the increase is quite
steep in the '80s and has not plateaued, but has become less sharp
in the intervening years. I don't have too much time, but I'd like to talk
about analysis, Larry Kahn and I did of the
wage gains because this does point to some
of the factors, and particularly the
rising productivity of women relative to men. Let's just start in 1980, the blue bars are just unadjusted wage
ratios that we just saw. The red bars are adjusted for major human capital factors, namely actual labor market
experience and education. Then the green
bars additionally, control for industry,
occupation, and unionism. What you see is a
story I was brought up on where adjusting
for human capital gives a significant boost to women's relative wages
because there were significant human
capital differences. Then a further boost we
get from adjusting for industry and occupation because those differences
were significant. The big news when we
fast forward to 2010 is how relatively unimportant the human
capital component is; women's human capital gap with
men has close to, closed. Again, this is a bit of a men effect because
women still do lag a bit in experience but they
surpass men in education. Industry and occupation
are still quite important but this is a bit misleading
in the sense that there has been enormous
convergence and occupations are significant
occupational gains for women in managerial
and professional jobs. That's masked by this
analysis because what we found is that women
still do lag men, there's still considerable
difference in occupations and
actually in industries. Also, the returns to being in some predominantly male
areas have gone up. The penalty women pay for the occupational
differences has gone up. Quickly because we're
interested in the gap, how are more skilled
women faring? What we found and I'll show
you some evidence of this, is that the gender wage gap has closed more slowly at the top of the wage and earnings
distribution than at the middle
and the bottom. Let me shift to
earnings how wages and labor supply factors have
influenced earnings. It is pretty much
as we'd expect; earnings differences between men and women have declined. Ratio has gone up, more in the '80s
than subsequently. In line to what I
just told you about wage differences at the
various earnings distribution, we see that earnings ratios have increased more
at the 10th and the median than they
have at the top. We see in terms of
the share above the earnings cap is that, and there is first of all, huge gender disparity here, so I'd like to point out to Social Security that
women have been a big resource in the sense that very high proportion of
their earnings are taxed. The gender difference
has narrowed a bit but it's still substantial with 10 percent of men having earnings above the cap compared to four
percent of women. Spouse benefits. Running out of time, but I just want to
point out that women contributing as workers only has solely on their own as
workers are higher share now of women receiving
benefits and I would expect that to
continue to increase. What about the future? Here again, I want to
emphasize that I'm just making some comments and
not for predictions but labor force participation, it looks after 20
years of stability. Little bit future participation
increases are unlikely. I noticed that
Stephen Keras model did not predict any
major increases. Again, policy could play a
role, work-family policy. Wages, I would say
given past progress, from the human capital domain, I don't see much
further increases just because women now are 57, 58, 59, 60 percent of college graduates, I wouldn't expect or even
want to go further than that. Actually, I'd like
to see a little bit restoring of
gender parity in that, this is recent graduates. Human capital gap has
almost disappeared. Differences in occupation
and industry between men and women have more
scope for progress but the integration of occupations has slowed
since the 1990s. There's never much
evidence of reduction in industry differences
between men and women. Those have been quite firm. I didn't show you
this in the graph, but the unexplained gap in pay between men
and women not due to human capital or occupation or industry has not
narrowed since 1990. Now, first of all, it did narrow in the
'80s, what did that mean? I'd say that was an indicator of rising productivity either due to improvement in women's
unmeasured characteristics or as Chad and that very
interesting work he mentioned; reduction in discrimination and misallocation or fully
utilizing women's abilities but the unexplained gap has
not narrowed since 1990, so it's not too
optimistic there. But policy could matter, work-family policy and especially more
spending on childcare. Though given the
very low levels, I'd also say parental leave in the United States could be increased and made
more generous. The repeal of abortion
rights in many states and possible other limitations on contraception are
concern in this regard. Just briefly, there are new anti-discrimination
approaches that might have some evidence in favor of them that might help reduce
discriminatory wage gaps. These are salary history bands and pay disparity. Thank you. 