Hey everyone, thanks for joining in. In this video, we'll be going over
how to run a Celestia light node. Also referred to sometimes as a
light client, and this is a tutorial that is geared towards beginners, so
maybe someone with a computer, but no development experience or with a
little bit of development experience, or you're just looking to learn more. So first, what is a light client? We actually have some really useful
resources on our website, and if you go to the glossary and to "light client" you'll
find that a light client is a type of node that only downloads and verifies headers. And this relies on the honest majority
assumption that the state of the chain indicated by the block headers valid. In short, what this allows us to do is
have light clients that download and verify a very small amount of data instead
of downloading and re-executing all of the transactions like a full node does. And what this allows us to do is,
have much cheaper and lower resource requirements for our hardware. So yeah, let's get to it. The first thing we're gonna do is head
over to the Celestia Docs and you can get there by going to docs.celestia.org. And we're gonna go to the "run a node"
category and in the quick start section, we'll see a guide on Docker setup. So this is where we want to be. If you're following along,
again, docs.celestia.org. And basically what Docker does is it
allows us to run celestia node in an isolated environment on our machine. And this allows us to
not have to worry about. The dependencies that are on our machine
or maybe messing up the environment that is on your computer already. So the easiest way is probably to
use the website to install this. I'm using a Mac, so I'm gonna go ahead
and click Docker desktop for Mac. I'm using an M2 chip on this computer
and I will need to download the Apple silicon installation file. If you're using an older machine than an
M1, you will probably have an Intel chip. Well, you, you will have an Intel chip,
so I'm gonna download this for Mac. And we can actually just
keep an eye on that download. All right, so now that the download
has finished, we're gonna open up Docker dot dmg, and this is
going to look like installing pretty much any other application. That you may have installed before. So you're just gonna need
to drag and drop that. And depending on the type of machine
that you're on, this might take a little bit more than 20 seconds or so. So feel free to pause the video
if you need to wait on that and come back when it's done. Now we have Docker installed on
this computer and I'm gonna go ahead and open up the Docker desktop app. Since this is the first time I'm
opening it, it's going to, my computer is asking me if I am sure
that I want to open this and I am. So I'll click open. And what this is doing is starting
up the Docker engine and this allows us to run containers. And again, we're running a container
so we don't interfere with our local development environment or
just local setup on our computer. So there's two ways to run the node. First would be the quick start. You can actually just
copy this command here. This is for a light node on
the Blockspace Race network. And if you go to your terminal
I'm gonna zoom in a little bit. So if we go in our terminal and put
this command in, And if we hit enter, it's going to initialize a node store. It's going to create a key for
us with a mnemonic, and it's going to start the node up. Now, the thing about this is that
the node store has been created inside of the container, so. We're going to see the node store
for this node inside the container. The issue is that once we stop the
container (node), we're going to need to, we're going to lose our keys and
lose the data that has been synced. So the way around this
it actually got stuck. So I went ahead and
paused it or canceled it. So, to get around this, what
we can do is we're going to. Do a few commands, but don't
let it intimidate you too much. What we're doing is making a new
folder and then we're gonna run the same Docker command after that. So the first thing we can do is CD
to $HOME, and this just makes sure that we're in the right directory. If you're curious about what
home is, you can do `echo $HOME`. And I can see that's in my
user's folder and joshstein. So first we're gonna do `mkdir`
Make Directory `my-node-store`. Now what this does is it created
a folder called `my-node-store` in the home directory. And if I want to see that, I can do
`ls` to see that my node store is there. If I'm. Curious about what's inside of it. I can list what's inside of it,
but there's nothing at the moment. So we're gonna clear off our
screen again and get started with initializing the node. So now that we have the node store set
up, This is going to allow us to keep our keys over time and reuse the  same
data that's been synced from the chain. So we're gonna copy and paste the first
command to initialize the node store, and we are using the local node store
and mounting it to the container that is using the image that we're running. This first command is just
going to give us our keys. I would recommend not recording a
video and posting it on the internet. If you ever want to use these
keys for any real networks and save this somewhere safe. If you need, you can always
export your keys, but having the mnemonic is always a good idea. The next thing we can do is start
the node, and we can do that by copying the next command. It's basically gonna look mostly
the same except for we have a few extra flags at the end to allow
us to post data to the network. Once I've done that, we're gonna see the
logs that everyone has been posting on Twitter and meme-ing, and you have now
set up your own Celestia light node. Now, if you want to stop this, you
can either use Docker to do so. I'm gonna delete these old
containers that I don't need. So you can either de
stop it and Docker or. You can do "control + C" to stop the node. And if you want to start it again, you
can just use the same command and it's going to sync back from your node store. So that's why we're not seeing
the mnemonic show up anymore or the initialization because
we've already done that. Yeah, that's how to run a
Celestia light node with Docker. And if you do run into something
like this it actually always doesn't hurt to just try to restart it. There we go. It is running and sampling,
and we can see the logs here. This doesn't have any debugging mode on
or anything, so we're just seeing headers .
And right now what we're doing is mostly
sampling those headers and we can see that we picked up from the last point that
we left off up here around block 6,000. You can also see the network
that you're on and the node type. And as well as your note ID if
you're really feeling froggy. So yeah, that's how to run a
celestia light node for beginners. Thank you. 