[MUSIC] A lot can happen in 12 seconds. Of course, this is referencing price change and what that does to a PBS auction. So what I'm really talking about here is, here's the Binance Order Book, 12 seconds before block 171... And here's the Binance Order Book right before, right when the PBS auction concluded. So on the left here, I have the Order Book animated. And we did our best to do this in real time. On the right is the PBS auction bids coming in. Actually, this block sold for 16.8 ETH, I think, to Beaverbuild Who are gonna show up again later in this talk. But you can see the price has moved from 1955 and then mid price is 1980 over on the right and that all happened in 12 seconds. And of course, the block cleared for a lot of money. And the reason is because of CEXDEX arbitrage. So because the price here has now moved almost $30. But the price on Uniswap, which hasn't moved because nothing has happened, is still the same. And let's take a look at the block so we can see the CEXDEX arbitrage transactions for ourselves. These are some of the 36 CEXDEX arbitrage transactions. Here is the first one. If you look over there, they bought more than 2,000 ETH from the Uniswap v3 5-bit pool and it was almost over $4 million. This was the first transaction in the block and it was put there, we think probably by the builder or by bot that was associated with the builder. And then the second transaction, by the way, is a similar transaction of a slightly smaller size on the Uniswap v3 0.3 fee tier pool, which of course has a wider fee, so there's less arbitrage. But in total, there was like 36 transactions and we find other blocks that are maybe even bigger price change that are even more of these CEXDEX arbitrage transactions. So builders compete by extracting more MEV and one of the biggest sources of MEV is what we're going to call top of block MEV, which is what I just showed you. That CEXDEX arbitrage that comes from prices changing on Binance and then arbitraging between the CEX and Uniswap, which of course, because Uniswap cannot do anything when there's no new block, there's no transactions between blocks on Uniswap, prices are going to be stale and LPs are going to get picked up. So we have a distinction here that we're going to make between top of block and block body and block body would be stuff that comes from sandwich attacks, kind of stuff that can come anywhere in the block that doesn't necessarily have to come early. And if you saw the transactions before, those kind of top of block, we just call them that because they just tend to show up right at the top of the block, probably because you have to pay for priority to get right up there. So we call that top of block and block body is kind of everything else. And the main point that we're going to make in the talk and kind of talk about what this means is that PBS bundles top of block and block body together. It's all sold together. You go to Costco, you get yourself the top of the block and the block body as a bundle. So if you're good at top of block, then block body is very valuable to you. If you're good at block body, top of block is very valuable to you. So who's good at top of block? Well, who's good at trading on exchanges? HFTs, people who are kind of prop shops, right? So we're going to call them HFT builders. Probably not that they are, I can't mention them for discretion purposes. But private order flow is more valuable to these builders because the block is sold together as one piece, right? And we're going to model that. I'm not going to mention it, but I'll look at the data speak for itself, who they are. The data we got, we just got the kind of block information from Etherscan and CEX data from Binance through TARDIS. And you can see, so we're not going to measure too much from TARDIS, just the mid price. So people are going to critique me for that after the talk. It's OK. I welcome it. But we just measured the mid price, so it's a pretty crude measurement. But as you saw, that's actually conveying a lot of information. Like when mid price moved $30, we had a hugely valuable block with a bunch of sex, exone transactions. So it is, even though it's a crude mid price metrics from Binance, it's still going to convey a lot. OK, so here's kind of an overview of the results. And ones that we flagged as HFT builders are winning more often when the price change on Binance in the previous 12 seconds is high, which is exactly what we expect. You can see the the build is there. Enjoy your own conclusions. So here is the results of our logistic regression. And I won't bore you with the details of how to estimate a logistic regression, but I'll just give you the bottom line, which is when price didn't move on the E pair on Binance in the previous 12 seconds, the builders we flagged as HFT builders only won 30 percent of the time. When it moves 1 percent, which is like the block we just saw, the builders we flagged as HFT builders won 80 percent of the time. And here's a multinomial logarithm just to give you a little bit more granular data. You can see flash bots who I think would probably plant their flag as being neutral, have a negative coefficient, which means they're not running a prop shop in the back of this. Builders 69 also tell you that they're not running a trading shop and they also have a negative coefficient. I don't know that anybody would be mad if I say the answer because they're not in the game anymore, but these guys were run by a. were definitely associated with an HFT shop and they had a very high coefficient. And then you can see Beaver, who won the block to be shown as a positive and high coefficient. And so does Rsync. One thing I know this is a block data people here. I'm going to guess I don't think you guys are on a prop shop, but I'm going to guess this is because you guys run your own relay. So let me know after that's right. But you guys have actually a high coefficient, which probably means that you guys are pretty good at winning these top of blocks, probably because people are coming to you because you have your own relay. So you get that. They can see the image. OK, now let's talk about the model quickly. We are wondering what this does and now we've demonstrated that people are some people are better than others. What does this do? Well, if you're really good at top of block, then in those few really highly volatile periods, maybe it's like 10 percent or something. Where it's super highly volatile, you have a massive advantage at winning the block. And so say an order flow auction is held at the start of the slot before any volatility is realized. If I know that 10 percent of the time I'm basically guaranteed to win or there's going to be very little competition because I run my own prop shop, then I can bid more for the order flow. Even if it's worth the same to us, no matter what, I know that I'm going to have an advantage at winning the block in the case where there's a bunch of volatility. Right. So in our model, we have two builders. They're competing in the PBS option. One has the scenario with two scenarios, one where there's kind of every order is in the mempool and one where all the orders are sold in an order flow auction The block body MEV, which is kind of the order flow that's sold in the PBS auction or in the mental or something, that has the same value no matter what to both builders. But one builder is kind of slightly better at the top of block. So it's only have another independent thing that tells them their block value is slightly higher. So first order stochastic, they dominate the other builders top of block value. And then to get the block value, we kind of add their block value value with their top of block value. So the results of our model show what we expect, which is that if you're very good at top of block, your advantage in those kind of five percent of super volatile blocks will end up meaning that you can pay more for private order flow. And once you can pay more for private order flow, and on the second talk to say this, once you have private order flow, you're going to win the PBS auction a lot more. So what's the kind of bottom line is that when you have a private order flow, you have builders who have other advantages elsewhere, not necessarily related to the private order flow, winning a lot more blocks. One way to get rid of this is to what we call unbundle PBS. This is the equilibrium. This thing that I'm showing the lambdas on the top, that's kind of the advantage for the building is better at top of block. The more the advantage, you can see the more the difference in winning probability, which is the distance between these two curves. And the more the advantage, the more the difference in revenue, which is what you expect. And there's this kind of disconfidentity. As soon as you get a tiny little advantage, you immediately become much more likely to win. And you can check out the paper for a while now. But one thing we want to discuss with everybody is what is one way to solve this so we don't end up with only two or three builders who are really competitive when private order flow comes in? One way is try to solve the top of block opportunities in the block body separately. And that way people are really good at block body, people who have private order flow and stuff can compete in a separate competition with the people who are really good at top of block. This also introduces us to having more efficient blocks that kind of are better for everybody except maybe to the HFT builders. 