Robert J. Richmond: This paper
is about which investors matter for global
equity valuations and expected returns. The starting point
for this paper is a large literature in empirical asset
pricing that focuses on a couple of questions. The first set of questions is
understanding whether it's discount rate variation or
cash flow variation or both, that explains variation in differences in valuation
ratios across firms. Both across time and
in the cross-section. The second part
of the literature studies the determinants of expected returns again in the cross-section and
in the time-series. Now the typical
approach to answering the first question is to use variance decompositions
where you use valuation ratios
and potentially other predictors to forecast future returns and
firm-level fundamentals. To answer the second question, what we typically do is we
use factor models to explain variation in the cross-section and time-series of
expected returns. Now this literature leaves a couple of
unanswered questions. The first is, what information
do investors attend to in the first place so
that prices are informative about
firm-level fundamentals? The second is, how important are different types of investors
for setting prices, and eventually in connecting characteristics to
valuation ratios and as well as differences in expected
returns across firms. That's where our paper comes in. Our paper is going to start with a simple theoretical
model that's going to motivate an empirical
strategy where we're going to be able
to understand which investors are more
or less important for understanding
the cross-section of valuation ratios
and firms and prices. We start off with a simple model that motivates this
empirical strategy. In the model we're going to have heterogeneous investors. These investors predict
future cash-flows and assess the riskiness of these cash flows using a set of characteristics that's
publicly observable, as well as potentially an unobservable set
of characteristics. Now investors
demand, as a result, is going to depend on
the prices of assets, as well as the
characteristics of these individual assets and this latent demand of
individual investors. If you clear markets,
this results in a hedonic pricing model where the valuation ratios across firms are related to
the characteristics, and the coefficients on
these characteristics are related to the individual
investor's demand. Now motivated by this
simple theoretical model that'll give you some
more details on, we're going to have an
empirical strategy. Our empirical strategy
has three steps. The first is to find a relevant
set of characteristics that explains the
cross-section of firm level valuation ratios, as well as forecasts future firm level
fundamentals or profits. Once we found a set of characteristics that
we think represents a reasonable basis
for explaining firm level prices or
valuation ratios, we're going to estimate an international
asset demand system. We'll do this both in
the US and the UK, and we do this using individual
investor holdings data. Finally, once we've
got demand curves for all of these
different investors, we can estimate counterfactuals. These counterfactuals
are designed specifically to understand
which groups of investors are more or less important
for prices being related to the cross-sectional
differences in characteristics across firms. In particular, what
we do is we compute counterfactual prices as of a particular group of investors, say hedge funds, mutual funds
or long-term investors, decides to follow a
passive indexing strategy. I'll give you more
detail on this later. Let me give you some details
on our theoretical model. The model is going
to be quite simple. It's going to have two periods, time 0 and time 1. There's going to be I investors. They're going to
be able to invest in n different assets. Now these investors are going to differ in their assets
under management. In particular,
they're going to have some initial assets
denoted by Ai zero. The investors care about payoffs in the second
period or time 1. They've got CARA-normal
preferences with some risk aversion Gamma i. Now we set this Gamma i
to be equal to some Gamma divided by the assets under management of each
of these investors. This allows us to have the tractability of
a CARA-normal model that gives us
similar implications to a typical CRA model. Now what are the cash
flows of the firms? The cash flows of the firms are some dividend paid out
at time 1, that's D1(n.) It's just going to
be the book value of equity times the
return on equity denoted by Rho(n) of
each of these firms. Assets evolves according to this equation at the
bottom of this slide, period 1 assets are going
to be the initial assets. Then each of these investors
are going to choose the number of shares that they invest in each of these firms, they're going to get some
return based upon whatever the ROE is over and
above the price, so we're just rewriting
this here, little q is the number of shares times the book value of
equity, and MB is the market-to-book ratio
of each of these firms. How are investors
going to differ? Investors are going to
have different beliefs about the fundamental cash
flows of each of these firms. This Rho i is going
to be the vector of the lease of ROEs of
each of these investors. They're going to differ
in their expectations of the expected ROE of
each of these firms, as well as the riskiness of the ROEs of each of these firms. They're going to use a single
factor model for ROEs, the single factor is
denoted by F here. How do each of these
investors form their beliefs about
the expected ROE, which is gi, and
the riskiness or the loading on the risk
factor that's Beta i. What they're going to do
is they're going to use observable characteristics. Those are going to be
in this variable x here, this vector x. They're going to have
different loadings on these observable
characteristics for each of the possible investors. There could potentially be some unobserved
characteristics which show up in these values, Nu i for both the growth rates and the loadings
on the riskiness. We're going to assume
that investors agree to disagree and that they don't update their beliefs
based upon observable prices. We do this for tractability. Given these assumptions, the optimal demand for
each of these investors, which would be this vector qi, is a function of a few things. It's going to be a
function of the price or the market to book ratio
of each of these firms, and there'll be a function of how they form their
beliefs about the growth rates
and the riskiness of the ROEs of each
of these firms. Now this demand curve at
the top of this slide shows that we can use investor
holdings data to see what characteristics
investors use to form their beliefs about the
actual firm performance. But we can't distinguish whether an investor holds more
of an asset because they have a belief
about the riskiness of the ROE or the growth
rate of that ROE. They enter the same way in terms of
characteristics there. The same can be said about this latent or unobserved
characteristics. Now we can clear markets,
just add up all of investors' demand and we can solve for valuation ratios of firms here, the market-to-book
ratio of firm n, is just going to be a function
of the characteristics. You're going to
have some loadings on the characteristics, as well as the latent demand
of each of these investors. Now this mi is going to
be some weight here, and it's simply the AUM weight or the AUM share of each
of these investors. What this expression
shows us is that the cross-sectional
valuation ratios depends on the underlying demand and the way that each
of these investors forms their belief based
upon the characteristics. What you see is that
larger investors or investors with
more extreme views are more influential in driving the cross-sectional valuation
ratios across firms. Motivated by this model, what I want to turn to now is our empirical implementation. What we want to do
is, we want to study which groups of investors
are more influential in driving cross-sectional
differences in valuation ratios and eventually expected returns across firms, and how both
expected returns and valuation ratios relate
to these characteristics. Our data comes from FactSet. We're going to use prices,
fundamentals and holdings from 2006 until 2016. We're going to look
across four regions, Europe, Great Britain,
Japan, and the US. That'll just be for
prices and fundamentals. For the holdings data,
in terms of coverage, we're only going to look
at the UK and the US. We're going to focus on
the top 90 percent of firms by market cap
so that we focus on the large liquid firms
that represent a lot of activity in the
publicly traded sector. Then finally, we're going
to classify each of these individual investors
into seven different types. We're going to have six types, which would be mutual
funds, investment advisors, long-term investors, which makes up
insurance companies and pension funds primarily, and sovereign wealth funds, as well as private banking,
hedge funds, and brokers. Anything that we don't
observe in the holdings data we're going to attribute
to the household sector, so that market's clear
and total holdings add up to the market
cap of a given firm. This is just the largest
investors in the US in 2016. The first step in our empirical procedure is to find a set of
characteristics that explains the cross-section
evaluation ratios as well as forecast
future firm profits. What are going to be
our characteristics? Here they are, there's
going to be six of them. We're going to use
log book equity, which is going to
capture some size effect and then our next four are going to be related to measures of productivity and profitability
at the firm level. We'll use sales-to-book as a canonical measure of
productivity, the Lerner index, which is just
operating income to sales, foreign sale share, which is motivated by the trade literature which suggests that only the most productive
firms choose to export. Then as a measure of risk, we'll use market Beta as a canonical measure of
equity market risk. The first thing I need to show you is that our
characteristics do a good job at explaining the cross-section of
valuation ratios. What we're going to do is
we're going to regress log market-to-book
ratios on our set of characteristics across
each of these regions, as well as future five-year ROEs on these
same characteristics. The only thing that I'm
plotting in this picture here is the R-squared
from those regressions. What you see is that in green you've got the
market-to-book ratios, in orange, you've
got future profits. Across all of these
four regions, you see that our characteristics basically explain
the majority of cross-sectional variation and valuation ratios across firms. They also do a fairly good job of explaining future
profits of firms. In the US, it's
about 30 percent, the only outlier here
seems to be Japan, which has a little bit
less explanatory power. Our characteristics do
quite a good job in terms of explaining cross
sectiona- differences in these market-to-book ratios. Now what we want to do
is we want to understand which of these
investor groups is more or less
influential in driving cross-sectional variation
in valuation ratios. What we're going to do is
we're going to estimate a tractable international
asset demand system. We're going to have N assets. Each investor can allocate
some AUM similar to our model in each
period, two assets. Now what we're going
to do is we're going to allocate any assets outside the top 90 percent
to an outside asset. The portfolio weight
of investor i in stock n in country c is going to
have two components to it. It's going to have the
allocation to a stock and conditional on
investing in country c, that's the first
component there, and then it's also going to have some allocation to country c. Let me show you these
portfolio weights. Here's the allocation to
a stock n once you've invested in country c. This is just going
to be a logit, so portfolio weights are
going to sum up to one. What you're going
to have is that the portfolio weights are a
function of a few things, prices or market-to-book ratios, the characteristics
which we have, and then latent demand, which is this Epsilon here, which captures any variation
in portfolio weights that isn't related to prices
or our characteristics that can't be observed
by the econometrician. How are we going to think about the cross-country
allocation? We're just going to have a
nested logit specification for the cross-country
allocation. This allows investors to
substitute across assets in different countries when
relative valuations change, and I'll show you
some estimates of this cross-country substitution for different investor classes. Just rewriting our
estimation equation. You can see two
challenges when we want to estimate
the demand system. The first is that latent demand, this Epsilon in prices could
potentially be correlated. This can happen in
two potential cases. The first is if investors
aren't atomistic, an investor might have
high latent demand, which could also push
up the price of this, or if demand shocks across
investors are correlated. We're going to need an
instrument for price. I don't have time to
talk about it here, but what we're going to
do is we're going to exploit exogenous variation in investment mandates
across investors following Koijen and Yogo 2019. The second thing that we're going to do in
this paper is we're going to make a
methodological contribution in terms of estimating
these demand systems. When you have some investors, not necessarily small investors, but some investors hold very
concentrated portfolios. This could be because they have very strong beliefs about
the underlying assets. What we make here is a
contribution that allows us to estimate the demand
system for all investors, whether or not they hold very concentrated or few stocks, we implement a ridge
shrinkage estimator to do this in the paper. What we do is we
shrink the loadings on characteristics towards
the market consensus. Let me show you some
estimation results. Here's estimation grouping all of the investors into
seven categories here. These bars represent AUM
weighted averages of the demand coefficients for
each of these investors. In the top left is the
coefficient on price. This is just the loading
on market-to-book ratio. What you see here is that
a lower value of this implies a demand which is
more responsive to price. What you see is that
hedge funds and households have the most elastic demand curves
with respect to price whereas
long-term investors tend to have the least
elastic demand curve with respect to price. Now the remaining five panels are loadings on characteristics. To interpret these, you have to know that these are deviations from the market consensus. The valuated average across these other five bars
would average to zero. What you see here is
that there's a lot of heterogeneity in demand for characteristics across these different types
of institutions. You see in particular
that hedge funds tend to lean against the demand for characteristics of other types of institutions. What about cross-country
estimation? This is plotting the coefficient which determines
the elasticity of substitution across countries for different
investor classes. A value of zero here would mean that markets are
perfectly segmented and investors just hold a fixed proportion of their portfolio in a given country. A value of one here
would imply that cross-country
substitution is just about the valuation of
the individual assets and has nothing to do with
the location of the country. What you see is that they
range from about 0.1-0.3 here, implying that markets
aren't perfectly segmented. How are we going to estimate
our counterfactual? Well, in general, all
unconstrained investors are marginal in pricing assets. But it could be the case that some investors are more or
less influential than others. How much a given investor
matters for prices depends on; first, their size, second, how different their
demand curve is from other investors, and third, how price-sensitive
other investors are to changes in other groups
of investors' demands. What we do is we compute
counterfactual asset prices as if a particular
investor switches to strict market weights. This is equivalent to assigning the asset-weighted
demand curve to that particular investor group. Here's the results for each
of these counterfactuals. Each set of bars represents
one counterfactual. On the left is for
investment advisers. What we do is we plot first
the ownership fraction of that group of institutions
and then in orange, we plot the total
repricing of the market. That is the absolute change in the market cap for all of
the firms in the market. What you see is that
the largest change in prices happens when investment
advisors become indexers. Part of this is mechanical, they have the largest amount
of assets under management. What you see is that as
you move to the right, the smaller investor groups change price is less if you were to counterfactually
change them to holding an index portfolio. What's important to
note here is that this is far from proportional. If you divide the fraction
of market cap change or the total repricing
of the market by the ownership fraction, what you see is that for
investment advisers and, say, long-term investors,
the ratio is about 0.5. Whereas on the other hand, for hedge funds, the
ratio is about 1.5. Dollar-for-dollar, when you change hedge
funds to pure indexers, they affect prices substantially
more than, for example, long-term investors,
which represent pension funds, insurance
companies, etc. That's partially because
these long-term investors are mostly holding
index portfolios. What about the relation between prices and characteristics? I said that we ran
regressions of log market-to-book ratios
on characteristics. What we're going to do
is we're going to rerun these valuation regressions in our counterfactual
scenarios with these new prices and see
how the relation between market-to-book ratios
and characteristics changes in these
counterfactual scenarios. What I'm giving you here is just the change in
the coefficient on the characteristic for market-to-book ratio for each of these counterfactual scenarios
across columns here. I can focus on the coefficient on dividends-to-book here. All of the coefficients
here are standardized. When we change investment
advisers to pure indexers, the relation between
market-to-book ratio and dividends changes by 8.11 percent for one standard deviation
change in dividend-to-book. Now, we can actually map these variation in the
relation between prices and characteristics to the relation between characteristics
and expected returns. We do this just by applying
the present value identity. Market-to-book ratios
are related to future expected
growth rates as well as long-run expected returns. If we assume that in the
counterfactual scenario that the relation between
future profits and characteristics
does not change, then we can directly take
this coefficient of 8.11, use the persistence of
aggregate expected returns, it gives us about a
scaling coefficient of 10 on this coefficient here. We can say that in the
counterfactual scenario where we change investment advisers
to pure indexers, one-year expected returns
in their relation to characteristics will change
by about 80 basis points. Let me conclude here. What we've done is
we've estimated an international asset demand
system that allows us to understand which investors and which types of investors are more or less important for asset prices and long-run
expected returns. A few of our key
findings was that as investment advisors have the
largest impact on prices, this is primarily
due to their size. But per dollar of AUM, hedge funds turn out to have the largest
impact on prices. Whereas long-term investors, insurance companies,
and pension funds, turn out to have the
smallest impact on prices. Finally, you see
that broker-dealers, because they hold a very
small amount of assets, they turn out to
hardly matter for this price formation process. Additionally, because they hold effectively an index portfolio. Now, our framework can be
used in a lot of ways. The first is that it can provide guidance to intermediary
asset pricing theory. What we've done here is
we've given estimates of the demand curves for all
kinds of different types of institutions and
showing how this aggregates up into
overall aggregate prices. You can use these
individual demand curves to understand each of these different groups
of intermediaries. Additionally, you could use this framework to understand why certain characteristics, for example,
environmental, social, and governance characteristics
or risk variables, how those characteristics
relate to evaluations and
expected returns, and which investors are driving the relation between
those characteristics and evaluation ratios. 