Shmuel Baruch: This paper is
joint work with Edie Zang, who is sitting over there. When you see the title index trading or index investment, a lot of things
come to your mind, and we just want to
acknowledge them. There are so many things
that you care about. Things like portfolio
delegation, benchmarking,
information acquisition. This paper is about the CAPM. That is to say at the end diversification or the CAPM is the rationale
for index investment. This is what we're doing. It's not that we dismiss all those important thing
that are on the board, but you will not see
them in this paper. We're CAPM. Let me show you the model so you
see what is going on. It's a static model. Only a single layer good, because we don't
want to care or mind about your choice
between butter and milk, so only one consumption
good. We focus on risk. It's a real economy,
so no money. We have n risky assets
that pay random payoff. It's a vector notation. If it's boldfaced, it's
either a vector or matrix. We normalize the number of
shares outstanding to one. It's okay. A portfolio is just the vector of holding how many shares you
have of each firm. The vector of all ones, is the market portfolio. We have the risk-free
asset in zero net supply. That is to say the price
of the bond is endogenous. It has to be because we need to have a risk-free asset in the unit supply so that the
risk free-asset is there. If it will be in
positive net supply or if we will not to
have it endogenous, it will end up to being
positive net supply, then it should go up to
the tangency portfolio, so the risk-free
asset is endogenous. Now, the first deviation from the standard CAPM,
we have two of them. Every investor is informed. You see the
information structure, and it reminds you wisdom
of the crowd things. Everybody is getting a signal centered around the two value, the payoff vector plus a noise and the noises are
independent of each other. Fine. Then it's an
exchange economy. Every investor has an endowment, consumption good
bonds in portfolio of risky assets which is a
claim on future repels. Given price vector, so
you give us the prices, the price of the bond and the price vector
of risky assets. Every investor has a budget
set or a budget equation. Every investor is
mean-variance precedence, that is to say
exponential utility here with its own coefficient
of risk aversion, so we have a cognitive
risk aversion. Now, it's the second
and last deviation from the standard CAPM. We are dividing the
set of investors into indexers and non-indexers. After all, we want to
do comparative statics. We want to see what's
happened as we change the size of the set of indexers. We have m investors, and we divide them between
index of the non-indexers. An indexer can only choose a scalar multiplication
of the market portfolio. The market portfolio is
the vector of all ones because we assume that only
one share is outstanding, so if you're an index investor, you are confining yourself
to the capital market line. You can buy as many
bonds as you want, as much of the market
portfolio that you want, but you cannot choose
individual securities. The non-indexers, well, they do what they want,
they choose portfolios. The equilibrium is standard. Basically, every
investor has a signal. Therefore, the demand of every investor depends
on inflammation, so prices should
convey information, so investors should
understand it and try to extract information from prices so when they solve
the optimization problem, the conditional
information not only in signals also in prices. Three markets have to be clear in regard to oneself
in equilibrium. Is it optimal to
index in our model? That is to say we, exogenously and arbitrarily say, we have a set of
investors that have to confine themselves to
the capital market line. Well, in a large
economy, in our model, yes, so what is a large economy? It's the usual exercise
where you make each investor or each
agent in the model small. Let me show you what I mean by large economy in our model. We have m investors and
our goal is to let m go to infinity so as we build
our sequence of economies, the asset payoff is
also going to increase. We increase the
size of the economy proportionally to m. We increase the number of investors, increasing the
size of the films, and our goal is to see what
happens when m is infinity. This will be our large economy. What about the signals? You see that v bar
is actually what is important because it's
informationally equivalent to v, doesn't matter which
of the two you use. For this slide, it's
easier to prevent it if the signal is
centered around v bar. It's informationally equivalent. What I want you to notice
is that as we increase m, as we go to the larger economy, the signals becomes pure noise. I started with the model
about informed traders, but actually what
we have in mind is where people don't
really know anything. What do we have in mind? But before, let
me just say this. At this point is
already the intuitive. The limit of the
sequence of economies, each informed traders
know essentially nothing, so you will not
be surprised that you get a standard CAPM where they don't lose anything if they remain on
the capital market line. They don't know more
than the market knows. We prove it in the
paper rigorously. What inflammation
we have in mind? Well, this is a model about
layman investors who observe falsely in their
surrounding inflammation that standalone is
extremely noisy. This come to show an
example where you basically observe the
parking lot in the shop. What can you do with knowing
what the parking lot is? Well, let's say you notice that it's Tuesday
afternoon, and it's full. You say good for love. Of course, it's pure noise, but if you want to know now, every parking lot in the nation, this will be valuable
inflammation. Standalone, almost noise. We can play out
more examples like this experience with
customer service. You flew in, and you had the wonderful experience with the customer service
or the airline, and you say good to them, but can you really
extrapolate it that much? Well, if you were to
know every passenger, how well or how much they enjoyed the travel
of the experience, then it's a valuable
information. It's not going to
tell you everything, but it's nevertheless valuable. This what we have in mind. For those of you who
remember the Zeno paradox, we basically take
the information and spread it among
infinitely many people, so each of them has
essentially nothing, but together we do have
something like Zeno's paradox. This is the idea of the Zeno's paradox or the Zeno storing. Our model when you carry it to the limit, everything
goes through. It is not the case that
because it's the limit you if pure noise as a signal,
the model collapses. Everything I'm going
to show you in the finite economies will carry through to the
large economies. Let me sum up so far. So far, we present a model that deviate from the standard CAPM in
two important ways. We divide the set of investors into indexers and non-indexers, and every investor
who is informed. I also revealed a spoiler, and the spoiler is that
in a large economy, every partition is rational because it is optimal to index. Everybody will be happy
or will not protest in the larger economy if we will assign him to the
set of indexes. We are okay to do our comparative statics
in the larger economy. The second spoiler of the tail revealed was that whatever we do with the finite economies will carry to the large economy. How do you assign the
equilibrium in such a model? When you read what Grossman
did and you follow. Grossman came up with
a fantastic apparatus or machinery to find the national expectation
equilibrium. Let me remind you how it goes. You give us a vector y, random vector y, you give it to us, and we take it to our agent in the model. We give them y, we take away from
them the signals. Now they don't have
signals anymore, they are not informed, they only know y. We also allow them to
do what they want. We forget about the indexes and non-indexed, they
do what they want. This is an artificial economy, it's very easy to compute the equilibria or equilibrium
in artificial economists, you do it point-wise. That is to say, you pick
a realization of y, everybody knows how to compute the objective because there is no prices there so it's easy, you don't need the fixed
point argument there. Everybody knows how they maximize given what
they can afford in their budget
constraint and then you find the price that
[inaudible] market. In other words, in
artificial economies, prices are not
conveying information, this is why it's easy, there
are just budget constraint. You solve the
equilibrium point-wise. For every realization of y, you compute the price. This is artificial economy. Now look here, if
you were to choose this y that is written
as Equation 2, and compute the prices in the artificial economy
when you give us this y, the prices you get are the equilibrium price
in the actual economy. To understand our p, you need to understand this y. If I leave this presentation making you feel
comfortable with this y, I did my job, everything else is just to deliver what
will become obvious. Let me just say one more
thing before I explain y, y is n plus 1 dimension, it's a vector with n
plus 1 coordinates. The prices are n
plus 1 dimension, we have n risky asset, the vector P, and the bond, so prices are informationally
equivalent to this y. Let's look now at this
y because whatever this y transmit also
prices transmit. Let's look at the
first n coordinates. They are the first terms of the sample mean or the
average of the signal there. It is the sample mean of the signals of the non-indexers, those investors that buy and
sell individual securities. If you remember your statistics, then the sample mean is a sufficient statistic for
the mean and here's the mean, is the future payoff. In other words, if you were to go and interview each
of those non-indexers, and ask them, what do you know? What do you think?
What about this part? What about that parking lot? You will find out that this first term gives you all the information
that you need, there is no need to go
and interview them. Once you have this
first n coordinate, you already know
everything that is relevant that those
non-indexers know. What about the last coordinate? It's only a single
one because it's a transposed vector
times the vector, so it's just a
single coordinate. Look at the vector G, it has nothing to do
with the division of investors into index
cells and non-indexers. Also, the summation
of the signals, it's nothing to do
with the division. What is this one? Easy to guess. It's sufficient statistics for the future payoff of
the market portfolio. In other words,
let me illustrate. I'm an index investor. I observe all things. I'm bullish on some companies, I embellish on some
other companies, overall I'm neutral. When I invest in the market portfolio
I'm neutral about it. Markets cannot tease out for my trading or for my investment, whether this is a situation
or this is the situation but I do give market or I do transmit what I think about
the market portfolio. This is what we see here, index investor do transmit to market what they think about
the economy as a whole. This information does not
get lost when in the index, but that get lost is the information of the sentiment about
individual securities. Here, we beautifully see that only the non-indexers
give it away. It's very intuitive. Once you know this, you will not be
surprised with any of the results that we
deliver in this paper. I believe that they
will all feel like, this was just
homework assignment. The uncertainty about payoff
for future securities, when you increase index
investment, it increases. Because we lose information. Correlation between
prices increases, because when index investor don't tell us if the situation is like this or like this, or like this and
maybe like that, only that they are neutral, we bundled securities together. The price is moving
out together, we don't separate them so correlation in
prices increases. Market portfolio
is not affected, but you know why, right? We don't lose information
about the market portfolio. R-square of the
CAPM is going down. Remember, the CAPM is not
just a theoretical model, it's also a statistical
regression. It's meaningful to talk
about it's R-square. Remember, what is the R-square? It's the proportion
of market risk. While we are increasing
idiosyncratic risk, R-square is going down. Let me show you some figures. We run your simulation in our model and we
estimated the CAPM. The green line is the actual, the theoretical ones that we
know because we simulated. The red one is the estimated, you don't see it well,
it's perfectly there. This is a simulation where
only single guys indexing. Almost everybody
is a non-indexers. What happened when
almost everybody index? When almost everybody index, CAPM still holds because
CAPM holds in our model but look how pathetic
R-square is. Now, you do see the red
line? You do see it. CAPM holds and we
don't reject the CAPM. I know many of you guys they're empiricist and you don't get the luxury of getting
100,000 observations. What if you were to
get only 100 of them? Almost no one index no harm. You get the CAPM, you name it. What if almost everybody index? CAPM holds, but you
would reject it. See how's the mean-variance
frontier look like. It's cute picture to show, I don't know what
more to say about it, but I remind you that this
is a conditional model. We have signal being realized, then prices being computed, then return being computed and we can draw the frontiers. The frontiers themselves
are conditional but this is a typical
picture that we see. The more indexers, the more nested it is. Capital market line
is unaffected, they all have the same
tangency portfolio. We can even compute
the equilibrium, or we can claim that we have an equilibrium when
everybody is indexing. When everybody is indexing, theoretically, we should have
many equilibria out there. Because if everybody
is indexing, we are pricing correctly
the market portfolio, nobody is trading
individual securities, so many possible prices for individual securities
provided the support, the price that we agreed on for the market portfolio of
equilibria or equilibrium, but we can pick one of
those many equilibria, the ones that is a natural
limit of our model. This is what we
show in this graph. It's actually
you'll see it jump, but if we were to
do it more refined, you will see that it's
really converging. I have more time? Two minutes, I will conclude. This is what the paper is, we developed a conditional
CAPM with index investors, I want to emphasize that
for investors in the model, it doesn't really matter but for the rest of us,
it's become interesting. I mean, for the rest of us, those of us who care about idiosyncratic risk, for example, those of us who
care about the CAPM as a tool to make
predictions or to go and argue what is
abnormal event or what is not abnormal
event, we can. That's it, thank you. 