Marcin Kacperczyk: One
question that I think we, oftentimes don't think too
much about is the question, why do we need finance? We all do finance, but we don't take this a
step back and don't ask ourselves the question why finance is actually important. This paper to some extent is trying to deal
with this question, why potentially
finance can actually matter and what
we can learn from financial decisions about a broader macroeconomic
environment. One of the points that is being raised oftentimes
when we talk about the role of
finance is that the financial sector or capital markets
more specifically, are actually
potentially good about allocation of capital into
the most productive uses. But it's theoretically appealing and we know that potentially
that could matter but at the same time, it's not obvious whether
this function is actually performed in an efficient
way as we think about. The goal of this
paper is think about this question from the
perspective of investments. If you think about it, traditionally, when we think about who these investors are, who are going to
perform this role of efficient capital allocators, usually we think
about local markets, where you have domestic
investors who are supposed to screen investments and make
as best possible decisions but to some extent, one of the big
phenomenon we had in the financial markets was
the rise of globalization. What we basically observed over the last couple of decades, and especially saw in
the last 10 years or so, is the real rise in foreign investment participation
in financial markets. In some sense, if
you want to put some numbers on this point, you can see, for example, that in the United States, the average foreign ownership of US stock has gone from
about two percent in 2000, to about 10 percent in 2014. More striking so actually, if you go outside the
US and if you look at the holdings of non-US stocks outside the US by the
foreign investors, you see that that number
has actually quadrupled. It went from something like five percent to
about 20 percent. Clearly, what is a plausible hypothesis or a plausible question to ask is, to what extent is this
raising globalization an important phenomenon? To what extent do
we think actually this foreign
institutions matter? Not just in terms of how
they allocate the capital, but how much do they
matter actually for the market efficiency and the informational
content of prices. This is the question
that we're trying to answer in this
paper empirically. As I said, this is an empirical
project, but of course, we are standing on the shoulders
of some of the giants. The giants who have actually thought about these
questions quite a lot. A couple of reasons to think actually why
potentially investors may matter for
capital allocation and this real efficiency. Starting with people
like Hayek or Tobin, there is quite a lot
of argumentation put forward that
actually investors may be good at screening
investments and they may actually produce
useful information in a way that actually
it can lead to proper allocation of capital
to financial markets. Alternatively, you can take
the Schumpeterian view and think about
intermediaries or some important investors
as a way in which they are actually able to screen good investments from
a bad investment. To the extent that they can perform this function
in an efficient way, you could imagine
that can also lead to some efficiency improvement. Finally, you can
also think about intermediaries or
financial sectors as being efficient as
enforcing some contract. To the extent that
intermediaries can actually be good at enforcing contracts, you could expect that
this value maximizing contracts are going to lead to some improvement in efficiency. All of this is good,
but of course, these are models that work somewhat in a
stylized environment. We think of them mostly thinking in the
absence of friction, but in reality of course,
they are friction. The fact that
institutions may be able to actually performing one
of these three functions, may actually be constrained
that they are actually these frictions that
limit this activity. There are a number of frictions
one could think about in the context of
international investments. A couple of them we list here. One of them of course, is the standard asymmetric
information problems. Being a foreign investor, you may not know as much about the foreign opportunities
as the locals. Separately, you can think about institutional
regulatory frictions. Even though you might know
something about investments, you may not be
actually allowed to transfer capital across borders. That may potentially limit your ability to actually
affect decisions. Finally, and I think
it's important to put into this project, is the scale of the investment. To the extent that actually these flows could be
potentially small, it may actually not be
economically relevant for any quantitative exercises that we could potentially
think about. Partly, the objective
of this paper was also to assess to what extent does
frictions actually matter. If we see that actually financial sector
performs this role of affecting real
efficiency in the economy, maybe this is one
way to think about, do these frictions
actually matter in a significant way or in what conditions actually they matter more than in others. One question which is
clearly relevant in the context of this market
efficiency discussion is, how do we measure efficiency? The finance literature and economics literature
more broadly, has fought about this
question for quite some time. We're going to take some
basically judgment in terms of what we think are the
right measures of efficiency. Not surprisingly, maybe why are we discussing this Tomar? One of the measures
that we're going to look at is the measure called
price informativeness, defined as the
predicted variation of cashflows using prices. Tomar in his paper with
Jenny Bay and Aleksey Savov, have actually rationalize
this measure using the Tobin's Q idea or
the Tobin's theory. Separately, Savvy
and Yaromi Nosal, have a paper on the
information theory, which actually shows
that this PI measure that Tomar has
proposed is actually consistent with that utility maximization problem
of people who are actually learning in
financial markets and allow for learning
from prices as well but needless to say,
we are going to also explore
alternative measures, and I'm going to
come back to this. Interestingly enough,
it doesn't really matter how you define
this efficiency, even though we are going to
focus on the first one as the primary measure of
price informativeness. Okay, so let me talk a
little bit about the data. I was very pleased to hear Motto advertising the various types of data that are these
days available to study decisions of institutions. What we're going to
actually do here, we're going to look
at the wide panel of the data coming from FactSet. FactSet is actually a great
dataset that allows us to look very carefully at the holders of individual
equities globally. We're going to look
at the universe of 40 countries at the
individual equity level, and we will be able to basically pin down
who holds each of these individual equities
over the period of more than 15 years,
from 1999-2016. For our purpose was going to be important is we are going to distinguish between
the types of owners. The types of owners we are
going to be trying to look at are the domestic
versus the foreign ones. Just following the
idea of this paper, but also to what extent are these owners actually
active versus passive? We have NBIM here. We can think of them more
as being passive investors, but of course, there
are also a lot of owners could
potentially actually learn and they are trying to uncover some private
information. We're going to append
this ownership data with various characteristics on this individual holdings
that are available. This is going to
come from Wordscope. In the end we are going to have a pretty large
panel of the data. We are going to have almost 24,000 different companies
that are being held by these investors
for about 200,000 stock year observations with ownership market and
accounting data. Just to give you some
preliminary starts, the average ownership
in the data, total ownership by institutions is going to be about 20 percent, but it actually varies across developed and emerging market. In developed markets that
number is about 25 percent, in emerging markets is
about seven percent. In terms of the domestic
versus foreign, it's still the case
that domestic investors actually hold more of
their assets on average. Then so is the case that active investors
are bigger holders. They're actually a
passive investors. Of course, there is a lot of cross-sectional variation
both across stocks and across countries
that we will try to exploit in this particular
research project. This is a graph that I would like you to think a
little bit about. It's a graph that shows you
where the flow is go in terms of the geography
of investments. We're comparing or contrasting
two types of scenarios. One is in 2000 and the
other one is in 2016. We single out the
important regions across which money flows. We have North America,
we have Europe, we have UK, Asia, and Japan. Then you have some
other countries which are listed below. What's important is the circles here in this graph are telling you about the importance of foreign investors for
each individual regions. Just to start with, you can see that in 2000, the importance of
foreign investors was relatively small. You look at the US, in the US market that we
do so much research about, foreign investors
were actually not at all important than 2000. Now they can
actually become much more important than
they were before. On top of what you see
actually is that there are certain links which
are stronger than others. For example, the link between North America and Europe is very strong in
both directions. On the other hand, for example, countries like UK don't
really trade with countries like South
Africa, Brazil, Chile. Clearly, that's the bilateral
relationship matters as well for what you can
potentially see in the data. How is it that we
are going to try to analyze this question
that we are after? We're going to start with
a very simple approach. The first approach
we're going to take is the simple summary of the
data for the portfolio sort. We are going to
construct this measure of price informativeness, which is this
predicted variation of a endings using prices for each year and
for each country, and we are going to sort
countries according to their either total or
domestic or foreign ownership. We are going to have a very
standard portfolio approach. We're going to sort
them into quintile and see whether there
is any a variation in terms of this
price informativeness across different sorts. This is the table that
is supposed to show you how this sorts look
like if you look at about predicted variation for the foreign investors and
for the domestic investors. Portfolios are
sorted from IO1-IO5, from the low to high ownership. Just as an example, you can see that for foreign
investments, the lowest ownership portfolio has a very tiny ownership value. It's just a basis points but if you look at
the highest quintile, you can see that
that ownership is actually more than 16 percent. Clearly, there is quite a lot of cross-sectional dispersion
in terms of ownership. What's more interesting
is what comes in the next two columns. What you can see is
actually that there is pretty strong monotonic pattern in terms of this price
informativeness. Portfolios which are helpless by this foreign
investors on average have much smaller
price informativeness than portfolios that
are held more by this investors and the results are very highly
statistically significant. One extra point to
mention is that there are also stocks which are not held by foreign
investors at all. To some extent the question is, to what extent the
question is about intensive versus
extensive margin? Does it matter that you actually have an
owner to begin with? It turns out that in the
context of foreign investors, it actually matters
a great deal. If you just go from the portfolio that
has zero ownership by foreign investors to
a portfolio which has a tiny ownership of
foreign investors, the magnitude in terms of the difference of
price informativeness is as large as if you go from the first portfolio to
the fifth portfolio. It's a little bit
like a mallet model. Investors actually have to be confident that they can actually enter into something
that is profitable for them to actually make that
move in the first place. It's actually a very
interesting observation, especially so that if you
look at the domestic sorts, this result is not there. It seems to be the case that the foreign investors
particularly are very careful when they make the decision whether
they want to enter a particular market or not. Of course, we want to see
how this pattern looks like over time and it seems to
be actually quite stable. This source that I
can show it to you as a summary statistic seems to
actually persist over time. That doesn't seem to be just a one particular time period that drives the variation. One could also wonder
to what extent actually the foreign investors are a proxy for domestic investors. There could be a
lot of collinearity between one and the other. What we have here is the
conditional sort in which we first sort investors buy
their domestic ownership. Then we do the second sort
by the foreign investors. Turns out that these are
actually independent sorts. Conditional or
domestic ownership, you still have quite a lot
of variation in terms of price informativeness
with regard to the differences in the
foreign ownership. Of course, these are all
univariate statistics. To some extent,
standard concerns about omitted variables or anything else driving
the results could be applying here as well. For that reason, we
are going to move to the regression
framework in which we will try to absorb as much of this variation as possible
in the framework. What we have is we have a pooled regression
in which you are trying to predict this
future fundamentals, the cash flows or endings, using the market prices. Then we will try to look at
the interaction effect with the institutional
ownership levels. The benefit of doing this is basically we can include a
lot of different controls, time-varying, and also we can absorb a lot of fixed effects. If you worry about some
unobserved heterogeneity that is driving the results, time-invariant 1, the fixed effects are going
to help you in this regard. Turns out that if you absorb
all of this potential omitted confounders in
terms of efficiency, the results seem to be the same. It doesn't seem to be the case that some characteristics or time-invariant potential
omitted variables are driving this results. Again, you find that actually stocks which are held more by foreign investors are
on average actually generating higher price
informativeness that don't. It turns out the
result is strong for both one-year predictability and the three-year
predictability as well. It doesn't seem to be just
a short lasting effect, is actually something
that affects these companies for a
longer time period. Now of course, as someone who has worked with empirical data, there is always a concern. How about time-varying
omitted characteristics? The standard endogeneity
problem here applies as well. Even though this is an
asset pricing paper, and in asset-pricing
we usually don't think too much
about endogeneity. We behave as
corporate guys here. We decided to actually
think carefully about resolving
this endogeneity. What we try to
actually do is we are trying to propose
an instrument or some framework in
which we can think about shocks into
foreign ownership, which are actually only
affecting the ownership but not price informativeness
at the same time. What is the shock that
we are going to look at? We're going to look
at the popular shock that people have used
in other contexts, which is basically
the index inclusion. What we're looking at here
is the situations in which companies are being added
to the MSCI global index, which arguably is the
most relevant index in terms of the global
portfolio allocations. We will try to see whether companies which are
added to this index are actually experiencing
different effects in terms of the price
informativeness relative to companies which are
very similar to the ones which are added
but have not been added. We are going to exploit
this basically experiment using a standard
diff-in-diff estimation. We will try to basically compare so-called
treatment group, which are the stocks
added to the group of control companies which
have not been added but they are very similar to mimic the counterfactual
behavior. This is basically the first
stage of this diff-in-diff. It's trying to show you to
what extent the match between the treatment and the control
is actually quite tight. What you see here is a bunch of different characteristics
along which we have actually matched the companies and the
take away from this table is to say that basically, these companies are not very
different from each other. To some extent the plausible
exogenous variation extent is satisfied here. Then what we want to see
is to what extent we see the differences
across the treatment and the control
group in the data. I'm going to show
you this results in terms of nice graphs. The graphs are going to actually show you the differences between the treatment and control group in terms of various
characteristics. What you see here in
the top-left panel is actually the
power of the shock. What you see here is
the foreign ownership for treatment versus control. You can see that as a
result of the shock, the foreign ownership of the
treated stocks is about two percentage points higher than the ownership of
the control group. Clearly, this shock
is a relevant shock, given that the average
ownership is about 10 percent, we are talking about
20 percent increase in ownership for this stocks. More interesting, for
us is that you don't see any effect on the
domestic ownership. It's clearly a shock
to foreign ownership that is happening as a result. Then the second stage is to what extent we
see the effects of that increased ownership in terms of price
informativeness. The right picture it shows
you actually that you do see effects which are actually statistically and
economically significant. As a result of an inclusion, companies which are
actually added to an index experience higher price informativeness
going forward. Clearly, that's quite
a comforting result. We confirm this results using the regression framework so I'm going to skip it in
the interest of time. Instead I'm going to show you
a couple of other results. One concern could be that the PI measure that we
are using is potentially special and it may not capture exactly the price
informativeness we want. We have considered three
different measures which are alternative and have
been used in other contexts, so post-earnings-announcement
drift, price nonsynchronicity, and the variance
ratios and turns out the results are actually
very consistent. You have here the same
type of pictures for the different measures of
price informativeness, they all go in the
same direction. That basically PAD becomes smaller as a result of an
inclusion in the index, price nonsynchronicity goes up, and the variance
ratio goes down, and all statistically and
economically significant. Now the question
to some extent is, what's the economic mechanism
behind this results? What are we learning in terms of what's happening with
these companies? To some extent, there are
two running hypothesis. One story that one can think about is the
high-tech story, which is that basically
the presence of this foreign investors
produces more information. There is more information
being produced in financial markets and as a result the cost of
capitals for example, goes down, the liquidity
of the assets goes up, and that leads to basically better efficiency of capital. The alternative is that this institutional investors potentially are actually
better monitors. They come to companies and
they make a real change. The governments of the company
improves and that's what leads to basically improvement
in terms of efficiency. We will try to
distinguish between these two possibilities
by looking at a bunch of different tests. The first one we
want to see is to what extent actually
this effects of foreign investors is the information disclosure story where some market participants are learning something
they didn't know these are the real
efficiency gain, that managers of these
companies that are actually behind are actually
learning something new from the fact that this foreign investors enter the market. The way we're going to
do it is we're going to look at the predictability of earnings instead of using prices, using
really investments. Now we want to see
to what extent this investment decisions that this management does predicts actually the earnings
in the future. Then we're also going to look at the information production in the market by looking at
the analysts production. Is there more analysts coverage
in the markets or not? By looking at cost of capital, is the presence of
foreign investors actually leading to
better risk-sharing than potentially
reduction in cost of capital and also, by
looking at the liquidity. Turnover and bid-ask spread
as a result of this entry. Then we're going to
contrast this with some effects on governance. Just in the interest of time, what we find is basically
that the channel that seems to actually dominate
is the information channel. It seems to be the
case that this foreign institutional
investors that actually improving
the real efficiency, that actually improving
liquidity in the market, they're reducing the
cost of capital, in fact the magnitude is about one percent difference
in cost of capital, and they're also actually improving the analysts coverage. Analysts are basically
covering the stocks as a result of the entry of
the foreign investors. What we do not find however, is that any governance
improvement in the data. It seems to be the
case that this is not the monitoring story I'll
assume that there is more the inflammation
story Aloha/Toby. These are the results,
I'm going to skip them. One last thing we've done was to assess the boundary conditions for the theories we are after. To the extent that
these frictions method, the ones that I mentioned in the introduction question
is how much do they matter? We look at a bunch of things to assess the interaction
with these frictions. One thing we look at is
activeness of investors. There are two types
of investors. Someone who comes just
to flip the stock without any real effects
but there are guys that can be again
I'm who are very curious and careful about what they are doing
when they invest. It turns out that
these are the guys who actually matter
much more for this price informativeness than the flippers in this market. Second is it doesn't
matter whether you are familiar with
the market or not. Is there some knowledge transmission that is
kept running along the story of asymmetric
information? The answer is yes. If you basically
have a closer links with the countries
in which you invest, turns out that this
is where it actually matters more for the
price informativeness. If you have higher
expertise when you enter the market say
you come from the US, which is a developed markets
to an emerging markets, that's where it
matters as well more. Finally, we look at things like capital controls and that
it seems to matter as well. If you have countries with
stronger capital controls, the effect is moderated
relative to those without. Then it seems to be
actually the case that, this is a bit like a
Schumpeterian story of creative destructions, that these institutions matter more especially in bad times. This is a one take at the time series
variation in the data. Let me conclude, so I
think what we want to argue in this paper is
that finance matters. I think I'm happy that
Tomar is going to discuss because he's been
saying it for some time. I think the answer empirically is that we do have
some evidence that financial institutions
can potentially elite to real efficiency gains. We see it through their sector which we consider
actually very important, which are foreign
institutional investors. We find evidence that is
actually consistent with the causal effect of this
foreign investors on the price efficiency
and we think that the boundaries of
the theories we should be thinking about seem
to actually have some bite in the data that
we analyze. Thank you. 