Arpit Gupta: The motivation
for this project is the observation that companies are much less likely to list on public exchanges
than they once were. An exception to this is Uber, which is leasing today, but otherwise we see many
more companies staying private either because
they don't IPO, or because they are purchased by private equity companies, or they're funded by
venture capital funds. This observation has many
different implications across different parts
of financial economics. One that we're going to focus
on here is what this might do to our assessment
of factor exposures. On the left, I'm cutting
by book to value, and by small and large stocks, and the observation
is that we have many fewer small
and growth stocks on the public markets
than we once did. The typical stock today, it looks much more like
a large growth stock than in one state previously. On the right, I'm picking up specifically these
small growth stocks by their share in the
value of the exchanges, and again you see
that they account for a much smaller size of
the overall market, consistent with this idea that the rise of private capital
financing techniques on private equity might be
accounting for a shift in the relative factor exposure
of what's listed publicly. This shift in capital towards private markets makes it
more important to try to develop techniques
that allow us to understand how risk is therefore priced in private markets. We have a number of existing techniques
that have been used to try to measure risk and return in private markets
such as private equity, which we're going
to focus on here. Some of these approaches include TVPI or cash in, cash out, which is measures the
direct proportion of cash received by LPs for one
dollar of contribution. That doesn't take into account discounting, let alone risk. You have the IRR are discussing, Antoinette Schoar has developed
a methodology that PME, which is very nice
because it allows for replicating portfolio, one that assumes that a dollar is invested counterfactually, and the S&P 500 instead of
the private equity fund. This is been built
on a little bit by Arthur Korteweg
and Stefan Nagel, in the GPME which still makes the assumption that the Beta
is going to be constant, and that all of these approaches have
that common limitation that they're requiring one
aggregate source of risk. What we'd like to do in
this paper is develop a novel methodology for
assessing risk and return, and generic streams of cash
flows that we're going to apply to private equity that's going to
allow us to develop, we'll think a little
bit richer methodology for understanding
risk and return. To do so we're going to borrow from a rich literature
and asset pricing, which has really emphasized the importance of the
cross-section and factors, as well as the term
structure of risk. This the term structure
is going to be really important
here because we're interested in understanding
private equity cashflows which are returned
back to the LPs with a considerable
amount of time like typically 10-15 years
for the cash to come back. It's going to be very
important to know what are the relevant terms
structure of risks that investors are taking on for that locked in
capital contribution. We're going to have the problem in doing this that we observe cashflows in private
equity, not returns. We have a ton of methodology in asset-pricing to understand factor exposures when we
have returned data that we cannot use when we
have only cashflows. To address that we're
going to develop of this methodology which
works as follows. First, we are going to take
publicly traded assets, and we're going to
strip them into the cash flows that come in
at all different horizons. This is falling very similarly from the work
by Ralph and Joules. The innovation here is that
rather than relying just on the subset of those publicly traded
dividends strip data, we're going to have an asset
pricing model that gives us dividends strips on a wide
number of different assets. We're going to have
different strips for value, for growth, for small
stocks and so on, so forth. What this is going
to allow us to do is match maturity by maturity, the cash that LPs receive when they invest
in private equity funds. This will allow us to construct a replicating portfolio
that is very well balanced in terms of the overall cash flow exposures to a private equity
fund investors receive. With this replicating
portfolio in hand, we're then going to be
able to do a lot of very nice asset
pricing techniques like understanding
the risk exposure, the expected returns, the risk-adjusted profits
and so on, so forth. Some of the key takeaways
from analysis is we find that these private equity
categories do tend to take on factor risks that is
specific to their individual sector. By that I mean, real estate private equity
funds take on exposure to things that look like
reads, for instance. That may not be very surprising, but our methodology
allows us to quantify the importance of these
non-standard factor loadings. We find that over the
life cycle of the fund, the risk exposure looks
a little bit more equity like early on in the
life of the fund, we can talk about that maybe
more in the discussion. We do find that
profits and expected returns tend to be falling
more in the recent data. We do find that there
is a substantial small and growth factor exposure in some private
equity categories, some suggesting that these
factor exposures have been eaten up in some
sense by private equity. This is the raw data that
we're trying to match. These are the cashflow
distribution, so limited partners and private equity funds across a number of different
categories. You may already be familiar with a buyout and VC categories. Those are the ones most commonly discussed in this literature, but I want to emphasize
that private equity also invest in a lot
of other things. For instance, we have a lot of funds and real estate
private equity, we have infrastructure funds, debt funds, restructuring
and so forth. Each of these, our
histogram bars reflects the cash received by investor
at a particular horizon, at a particular
quarter and time, and all generically follow this hump shaped
distribution pattern. At the very end, we've
got terminal cash flows, those that happen after your 15. Actually it turns out
we have quite a bit of cashflows that happens after the fund is supposedly
no longer operating. This gives you a little
bit of sense of what's the variation in the data that we're interested
in understanding? Each of these lines
corresponds to a cashflow distribution sequence for a particular vintage, for a particular year in which
the fund was originated, and we see rich dynamics. The life cycle
dynamics that we're going to be matching
on average is basically that
hump-shaped profile that we're going to see
across different vintages. Then we also see a
little bit of variation depending on the business cycle, the time of fund origination, so our estimation is
going to be trying to account for those
two main sources of variation that determine the overall cash flow
profiles of the funds. To do so, we are
going to develop these different assets strips. For the zero-coupon bond,
that's pretty straightforward. That's an asset that
pays off zero in every period until a
particular horizon, t plus h. For an investment
that's buying this at time t. For the
dividend strips, that's going to be an
asset that pays off the claim to the
aggregate dividend index, let's say at time t plus h, nothing before and
nothing afterwards. Similarly, we're going to have a defined dividends strip, not just for the
aggregate stock market, but also for reads, for small stocks, for
value and so forth. The advantage of
stripping off the cash in this way is that
if you're thinking about a private equity fund
with a defined horizon, you don't want to
match that with equities that are
paying off claims to dividends that might occur before or after at
various points in time. By defining the specific
horizon of cashflow, we're going to be able
to match the cash received by the investors
much more directly. We're going to have prices for these different dividends
steps that come from a model, I'll talk more about
that in a few minutes. What I mentioned is that
we have a process to match those dividends
strips horizon by horizon. For each particular quarter that we observed the cashflow
coming from the fund, we have a corresponding
dividend strip for that precise quarter. We're going to match a number of different factors for each
fund category that we've chosen to try to have a parsimonious balance of
different factor mixes. For buyout funds, we're going to be looking at the bond factor, stocks, and small. For VC, we're going to
be looking at bond, growth, and small. Then for real estate
and infrastructure, we're going to be
taking bonds, stocks, and then a factor,
specific factor exposure. We played around a lot with
different types of factors. These are just a set of three that tend to
unbalance much well, the cashflow profiles of
each of these sectors, while also carrying
some economic meaning as to why they're there. When we estimate
these loadings of different Betas on the
different factors that correspond to the
dividend payouts for that particular horizon against the cash flow for the
private equity fund, we're going to
allow this Beta to vary on two-dimensions. First is going to be the age. We're going to allow
every single age of the fund to have
a different Beta. We're going to allow for this exposure to
be more weighted to equity or to bond at different parts of
the fund life cycle. We're going allow
to vary based on the [inaudible] of the price of dividend ratio of the
vintage origination here. We're going to look at
the marketing conditions basically the time the
fund was started and use that as an additional
conditioning variable to discipline how we govern
our replicating portfolio. When we do this estimation, we'll start with a
baseline OLS model. We're also going to have
a Lasso estimation here. The key benefit of the
Lasso in this context is it allows us to generate
a long only portfolio. We just shrink all of the
negative estimates to zero, and so this results in a replicating portfolio that is realizable through
long only positions. That gives us the Beta. Again, the Beta is
just what mix of different assets strips will replicate the cashflow
for the private equity. We're then going to
translate that into an explicit replicating
portfolio through the use of our prices for
the different strips. I'll talk again where
these prices come from, but the basic conceptual idea
is that we want to price all the different
claims that make up the replicating portfolio in a way such that its
budget feasible. It could be the
private equity is well replicated through a series of cashflow exposures that
are very expensive. In that world, private
equity is going to deliver a lot of
value because it's giving you the same
cashflow that you would otherwise have to pay a lot of money for in public markets. A replicating
portfolio that uses the market prices of these
different assets will allow us to really
assess whether or not they're delivering
risk adjusted profits. We're also going to be able to look at expected returns. Again, that comes from a model, because we have the
factor loadings across the different segments
we're going to be able to understand what the
expected returns are going to look like or suggested to look
like in the future, even for funds that have just
started operations today. I mentioned our profit
analysis is going to have the benefit that it adjusts for the cross-sectional
factor exposure, but it does not correct
for the illiquidity. Part of the additional outperformance of
private equity here, you could think of as being
some premium for illiquidity. As an aside, it's
not even obvious, the private equity does carry a meaningful premium
for illiquidity. As we discussed with
the pension funds that invest in this
stuff quite heavily, they are able to
recognize these assets at very favorable
regulatory regimes that generates additional
demand for private equity. It's unclear even how to think about that illiquidity premium, perhaps we can talk about
that more in the discussion. Just a few brief words on
the asset pricing model, this is a fairly
standard via approach, in which we are going to include a large number of
relevant bond variables, a short rate, realized inflation, five to
one-month treasury spread, as well as a number
of stock variables. The price of dividend ratio, dividend growth across a number of different factor categories. We have a pretty standard
conditional log normal SDF. Just to go through the
asset pricing model briefly it fits the
data pretty well. We can match the time series
of bond yields pretty well, we can match the underlying components
of the bond yield, the real and nominal one, and we also match for the
stock data pretty well. What I want to mention in a
little bit more detail is, what this looks like in terms of the term structure of
different risk premium. The thing that we're
really going to take away from this asset pricing model, is the rich dynamics
across different factors, and across the term structure of risk premia for these
different factors. That's going to be very
important in matching the precise characteristics
of private equity funds. One thing that I thought
was pre-interesting here is if you look at
the top right panel, so this is the
difference between risk premium for
equities in general. If you look at those two lines
that are downward sloping, those are the future's
risk premium and so that's what's been discussed in [inaudible] work for instance, a downward-sloping in
terms of structure of risk when you look at
the dividend strip data. What we're focusing on here is actually the spot risk premium, which is actually
upward sloping. The difference between
these two is basically the nominal bond yield. What we find is that
even though we match that downward-sloping risk
premium for the futures, we actually going to be using upward-sloping term
structure because we're focusing on
the spot rates. We use that data on dividend strips directly as well as the moment
in our estimation, so the red line here
corresponds to what the data indicates on
dividend strip information, and the blue is what
our model suggests. On the right panel, I think
this kind of interesting, it illustrates one of
Murphy's laws which is even if you didn't think
about what should be, the share of the next
two years worth of dividends on the stock market
relative to the price, so that's what I'm
planning here, the eight quarter QM dividends trips relative to the price. Even if you didn't think
about what that should be, you might think it
should be stationary, it doesn't particularly
look like it's stationary. It turns out actually that
in more recent years, we've been valuing
much more heavily the cash coming in at
later points in time, and inequities relative to
cash that's coming in sooner. All this is obviously
going to be very relevant for us and having measures of how to price these risks and we compare this to
private equity funds. Again, the key takeaway for
this exercise for us is that we're going to have prices across these
different categories, bonds, stocks, reads, and so forth that have these rich dynamics
in the time series, and have a rich dynamics in
the term structure of how different claims are
going to be priced for cash which is coming
in one year from now, five years from now,
10 years from now. To get to where we
find our estimation, we are looking here
at buyout funds, and we have the
loadings on bonds, small factors, and stocks. We find fairly
sizable stock loading across different horizons, we've got a bond loading
that's a little bit more substantial later in horizons, and then we've got this
last little tale of fairly heavy exposure and that matching the
terminal cash flow, that we've aggregated
together for all the cash coming in after Year 15. We have an R-squared of about 0.17 when we look at
this in a panel setting. If we collapse everything into a portfolio
we actually get a substantially higher
R-squared of about 0.9 so indicating that there is a lot of idiosyncratic
cash flow going on with these funds that
washes out on average. We find across the P/D Terciles we've got a little bit
higher loading for stock factors in the
lower P/D Terciles rather than in the third one. This is what it looks
like when we move to our Lasso estimation. Here we've constrained all the coefficients to be positive. We find us pretty
sizable equity loadings in the first half
of the fund life. Those are the loadings
associated with small and stock factors and, then larger bond factor
loadings later on in life. This is what it
looks like for VC. Here we see a greater role for growth factor as well as a small factor suggesting again, that these alternative
factor exposures are important in understanding
this private equity category. For real estate, we observe
a larger loading on RETS. That might not be very
surprising to you, the real estate funds
have exposure that looks RET-like to
some extent but our method allows us
to quantify exactly how important we think
this loading is, and where in the fund's life it appears to be at greatest. This is what we have
for infrastructure. Again, some evidence
of loading on infrastructure-specific
factors for this category. Taking all of those
factor loadings together, putting those in a
replicating portfolio, what you're able
to do then is to compare what the
profits look like. Compare the returns to one dollar invested in
the private equity fund with one dollar invested in
our replicating portfolio, investing it at the same
time that the fund starts. For the buyout category, we actually find
fairly strong evidence of these risk-adjusted profits, those are all the histogram
plots on the right there. Those correspond to investors
receiving more from private equity than
they would have received from the
replicating portfolio. These profits tend
to be a little bit higher in some prior periods, so the '90s which is a time
when many people think, those were the golden
age of private equity is when we observe pretty high profits for
the buyout category. We see this really strongly
for venture capital. Here we see really high
profits in the '90s for venture capital and which have gone down substantially since. Remember residual
profits here can reflect as well compensation
for illiquidity, as well as some superior
marketing advantage for the private equity managers in terms of their market
timing, and so forth. Another way of assessing the relative performance
of private equity managers here is to look at the IRRs of the
replicating portfolios, relative to the IRRs
of investment strategy that buys up all the private
equity funds in that year. On average it seems like our
replicating portfolios are matching the changes relative to the private equity funds, but for the buyout category, we tend to observe that
the buyout funds tend to outperform a little bit relative to that
replicating portfolio. There's actually
less evidence of outperformance in the other
categories we look at. Our methodology is also able to look at expected returns, here giving you the
expected returns across the life of the fund. A lot of the expected return
at different horizons here has to do with
the stock factor, there's a fair amount
of bond loading as well in the middle of
the life of the fund, and we also have this
return for the time series. This actually falls I
think very closely to what John Campbell was also
discussing last night, and that the
expected returns for private equity do seem to
have gone down substantially. This seems like a trend
across different markets. Here this measure
of expected return is coming from our
replicating portfolio. We benchmark our estimates
relative to other approaches, so here this is the
risk-adjusted profit against the Kaplan-Schoar PME. It's a fairly high
correlation suggesting that the approach does
seem to line up with other conventional measures
of private equity, with the additional advantage
is that it gives us a lot more detailed
asset pricing things that we can do in terms
of factor exposure, difference of categories, and things like
expected returns. Just to wrap up, our
key contribution is to develop a new
methodology to value private cash flows
that allows us to assess the risk and
return characteristics. We've applied that
to private equity, finding that these
funds do take on some asset-specific
exposure and that their risk-adjusted profits have been surprisingly well but going down over time. Thank you. 