Lawrence Christiano:
This is Dynare or something that we all want to. How many people are
familiar with that program? Or I should say,
how many are not? We're going to play
around with Dynare, and partly, those of you who
are not familiar with it will figure
out how to do it. But then the other
thing is in the process of playing around with it, we're going to illustrate
some ideas that I think that are
fun to talk about. That is to say we're going to be talking more applications now. Let's get into the
new keynesian model to use as a vehicle for
carrying this stuff. The new keynesian
model is now king. There is no other model. The only understanding
that people have, I'm going to keep saying
things until somebody objects. The only existing
framework for thinking about what's been going on for the last couple of years is
this keynesian framework. There is no other framework. The fundamental language, the fundamental concepts,
the fundamental fears, the things that policymakers when they wake up
in the middle of the night and they are
terrified of things, that image that
they're afraid of is something that's articulated by this new keynesian model. We may get into that
as we go forward today or if you like me
to explain that more, we can talk also about
it in breaks any event. I'm going to talk about
the simplest version of that model now. What I'm going to do
is I'm going to derive the non-linear equilibrium
conditions of that model. We need the non-linear
conditions. If for example, we're going to study what's called
Ramsey optimal policy. Now, some of you are familiar with that already,
some of you are not. Both either way, will be more precise about what
that is in a moment. In fact, even if
we want to study Ramsey optimal policy
by doing linearization, we need the non-linear
equilibrium conditions associated with the model. You'll see that when
we get into that. The non-linear
equilibrium conditions of the new Keynesian model, which are not typically
written out and some of you may not have seen them
before are very important. We're going to derive those. Maybe explain moment
here what Ramsey is useful for one is for
defining the output gap. One of the most, possibly, maybe the most
important concept in macroeconomics is
the output gap. Whereas the economy relative
to where it ought to be, should be something.
The output gap. In order to define
the output gap, you have to define what's not hard to
define where you are. You're just going
to measure GDP, but you have to define
where you ought to be. That's the other part
of the output gap. One definition of
where you ought to be is the Ramsey
equation equilibrium. Ramsey will be used to
define the output gap. When we talk about a
positive model for the positive version of
the new keynesian model, I'll be using a Taylor
rule and we'll need an output gap in there and in order to find
that output gap, I need the Ramsey equilibrium. Then also if we got at the end, which I
don't think we will. We talk about the
timeless perspective and various other things that we need and we want to do Ramsey optimal
policy in real time, then we also need Ramsey. Therefore we'll
need the non-linear equilibrium conditions. Of course, it's obvious you need the actual equations
of the equilibrium, if you're going to do
higher-order perturbations like we've talked about
at the beginning. I don't know why the word
non-linear has to be added. We need the actual equilibrium
conditions for the model as opposed to the
linear equations that most of you
are familiar with. Then the other thing
we're going to do is study the properties of the new keynesian
model using Dynare, we'll show various
properties in that model. I'm associating with
Claida-Gali-Gertler, but probably it should
be Woodford too, I'm not sure it's
the right thing. I always put this reflexively, but I'm sure that's not
correct. Exactly correct. It's certainly a model
that they emphasize in their famous papers
in the late '90s. The model is, there's a representative
households that maximizes this utility function
of consumption and labor and then there's
this preference shock. The budget constraint
is the simple model, so there's no capital in here. We'll be able to
illustrate tons of great stuff with this model. I urge you everyone
in your back pocket, always leave a little space
for this particular model. As questions come up, you can pull it out
and answer them. Even while you're
riding on the bus or just hanging around, not sure what you're doing, this model is a fantastic
model to ask all kinds of interesting questions
and many of them, the answers you
get do generalize actually to the more thing. One of the equilibrium
conditions associated with this model is the first-order
condition here for labor, that the cost of working, which is the utility cost
of working measured in consumption units
has to be equal to the benefit of working, again measured in
consumption units, which is the real wage. Then we have the inner
temporal order equation, because this is a non-linear
equation. There you go. Nonlinear equation. You have the intertemporal
Euler equation, that's this equation here. I will have occasion to look
at the linearized thing. Let's just quickly
write that out so that in the log case we have the consumption growth here. Then write this everything
in terms of log like that. No, problem yet. Now I
just committed a crime. I moved the e through the exponential
operator because this is a convex function, the
exponential operator. There should be
another term here, positive term, but
it's very small. I'm going to ignore it. I'm appealing to the
first-order approximation is actually justifying that thing. There's a little
term missing here, has to do with the variance of the one-step ahead uncertainty
in these variables, which is a tiny number in macro variables like that and take the
log of both sides. Then we have this intertemporal
order equation that the expected change in consumption has to equal
the real interest rate. Okay. But still this is the
non-linear equation here. That's the approximation. There's a tiny
approximation involved. I'm going to use this equation a bunch. This is the log linearized intertemporal Euler
equation here. We'll be using that
equation more later. There are some final
good firms here. This is the basic
structure of this model. They buy all these
intermediate goods. They buy them at prices PI, then they sell them, and then the final good
producers sell Y at price P. This is their profit
function here, they use this to produce this stuff and here is
their production function. This is the standard setup here. Then the first-order
condition for these characters gives
you the demand curves that the suppliers of
the ith good are facing. You put all those Euler
first-order conditions into the production
function and you get this aggregate
condition on prices. This is an equilibrium
condition. The prices have to satisfy this relationship
here at the bottom. This is one of the
nonlinear equations that characterize
the equilibrium. We're going to try to compactify this down to six equations. When you start at the large set, this is one of the
equilibrium conditions. The intermediate good firms, they face the demand curve. They realized that if they raise the price on their good, then the final good firm
will buy less of it and so on according to that pattern there and that's
their demand curve. The technology that
these people have is this simple linear
production function. Notice I specified the
growth rate of a to be a positively [inaudible]
ar1 process. One of the things we're
going to see is whether it's a growth rate or
the level of a makes a huge difference for really
good economic reason, makes a huge difference to the dynamic properties
of this model. Then we have that
there's a Calvo price-setting frictions
at the Ith firm. Either optimizes its price, sets it to a price p tilde. There's a typo here, this
should be the lag price. Or alternatively, they set their price to the lag price, lagged value of their own
price with probability Theta. The p Tilde doesn't have an I index in it because every intermediate good
firm has the same state, and so when they optimize, they make the same decision. That's why there's
no I over there. That's their problem. One of the equations,
it's a variable, it's going to matter a lot in this problem is the marginal
cost of these firms. There was no price
setting frictions, given the constant
elasticity demand curve, they would always set
their price equal to fixed markup over marginal cost. Marginal cost would matter if there were no
price frictions, and then with price frictions, marginal costs still
enters the picture. Marginal cost is an
important variable and I'm going to define
this thing lowercase s, as the real marginal cost of production for the Ith firm, which is well, the usual thing if
the numerator is the cost of an arbitrary
selected input. In this case, there's
only one input. It's the cost of a worker divided by the
productivity of a worker. That's the thing up there. I'm imagining that the cost of a worker is the real wage, but they're getting a subsidy. For reasons that
are too boring to go into in great detail, I'm going to set
up this model so that at least in
the steady-state, all the equilibrium
allocations are efficient. The model has two
sources of inefficiency, the New Keynesian model. One source of inefficiency stems from the assumption
that there are price setters. That is to say, from the
assumption that there's the monopoly power that you need in order to rationalize
price setters. That monopoly power
causes them to restrict output and makes the aggregate
level of output too low. That's a drag on the economy, keeps it away from
being efficient. That inefficiency
we're going to remove by subsidizing these guys. What we really should do
is pass a law that says that you dare restrict
output, we shoot your ass. But what actually
we're going to do is we're going to give them a subsidy to produce the amount
that they're supposed to. The second source
of inefficiency in the model has to do with
the price setting frictions. The price setting frictions
have the implication that, if aggregate prices
are moving around because some prices can't
move and others can, it means that there are price
differences in the economy. When there are price differences the given amount of labor is not allocated equally to all these production activities, and because of this
production function, this production
function here has the property that
if you have, say, 100 workers and you allocate them equally
to all the tasks, then you get the most out of those workers
you possibly can. If you have 100 workers
and you allocate four to this I and 50 to that I and 60, well you can't do that.
It doesn't add up to 100. But if you don't
allocate them equally, then you get less Y. There's two sources
of inefficiency. One is the price frictions which cause a misallocation
of resources and cause you to get
less final output than you might otherwise get, and the other one is the inefficiency
coming monopoly power. This economy is going to
be set up in such a way that if the shocks
are all turned off, eventually all those
inefficiencies disappear. The first step I'm going
to have in doing that, I'm going to subsidize
these guys and I'm going to subsidize them exactly
at the right rate so that we get the
efficient outcome. This is the definition of
real marginal cost and it includes in there the subsidy that I'm giving these people. The firm is required to satisfy whatever demand
materializes at its posted price. The only decision this
firm really has to make is how to adjust its price and that's
going to deliver other equilibrium conditions. However, they're a pain in
the butt these conditions because of this weird
cowbell friction. Let's have a look at that. Here's the problem of the
intermediate good firm. By the way, we know
what the answer is going to be in the
end is that they're going to set their
prices as a function. The guys who are optimizing
and I set their prices as a function of marginal cost today, tomorrow and the future, they're going to look
at marginal cost for all time because
they realize there's some chance that that
price they're setting today is going to be the
price that we're going to be stuck with tomorrow. If there was no chance
they will be stuck, they would just
set price equal to a markup over current
marginal cost. They wouldn't care about
future marginal cost. But because they know they might be stuck with
their current price, they'll care about
future marginal cost. That's going to be the
ultimate answer here. But we have to get
it in a compact form that we can stick
into a computer. Here's the objective
of the firms. This is their time
t plus j profits, this is their costs. Notice there's no
I in this cost. Because of the linearity of
their production function, the marginal cost for
every single firm is independent of how much
stuff it's producing. There's no I in there anywhere, and as a consequence, when you look at the
profit function, there's no I inside this s here, there is an I there, that's
how much they produce. Then this, of course, this is the aggregate price index
that reflects simply that this s defined as
having been divided by p, so this gives you
the nominal cost and this is the nominal
revenues and this is the value of profits
at the day t plus j. That's our objective. The
ones that are maximizing that objective are
only worried about the future states
of the world in which they're stuck
with the same price, which means there's a subset of paths through the
future event tree that they worry about, and that subset of paths
has probability Theta j. That's the probability.
Their objective, they can ignore all
the other paths where their prices change. The price, the guy
who's optimizing and choosing pt tilde is looking
at that objective there, the one with the Theta^j. This expectation here includes all the idiosyncratic
expectations about adjusting prices. That expectation only involves the aggregate uncertainty and the idiosyncratic
uncertainty is incorporated by the Theta plus Theta^j there. Now we just work this thing out. They're required to
satisfy the demand curve, so that's the first
thing I did was I, substituted out the
demand curve here and I get this expression. I got rid of the Yi and substituted it out
using the demand curve. Then I differentiate with respect to the price they
are trying to choose, and then we get some
nasty-looking expression. Turns out to reduce down
to this thing here. Then the next thing is we work with that
expression a little more. That's just a copy
of the previous one, and you end up with, in the end this expression here where I have defined
this little price, this p tilde, which
is the ratio of the actual price they choose
to the aggregate price. There's an inflation term that has to show the p. This guy here to write this
guy in terms of this, you need an inflation term to take into account that
this t plus j is not equal to t. You've got the same ratio here and this
involves the inflation term. This is just a rewrite of
this first-order condition. Having rewritten
that, there it is, we can now solve for p tilde and p tilde is just
the ratio of the, you're just looking at
the future marginal cost, which is exactly
what you expect. These guys are setting
their prices today as a function of the discounted
future marginal costs, so it's a ratio of two things. This is not convenient, this expression because it involves an infinite
number of variables, and when you type stuff
into whatever [inaudible], you can only type in a
finite number of variables. We have to write this. We have to express. We've got this
price that they're setting in terms of a k and an f. But that's good news because there's
only two variables. Bad news is k is an infinite order present
discounted value. However, there's a simple recursive representation
for that stuff. You start at the top over there, write out what k is, and then you do a
bunch of substitution, take into account the
recursive form of this X guy and you go and you scramble and then you sprinkle
a little lemma on there. Lemma is the law of iterated
mathematical expectations. Then you go like that, and then boom, you see that you've got
the exact same thing on the right that
you had on the left, except at a different
date so we got a recursive formulation
for this thing. It only involves that present discounted value
can be expressed in terms of a very small number
of variables. There it is. I want to get rid
of marginal cost. We can do it in that way. It'll be important for us to notice this a little bit later. Real wage is equal to the
marginal cost of working, again denominated in
consumption units. That's been substituted
up there because this guy here is going to cancel by the construction
of the subsidy. What we get is that the price is the ratio
of those two things, that the numerator is
this recursive thing and the denominator is the
same recursive thing. It's actually a
little bit simpler. F is just this. We're now getting that into
some very simple variables, but this p tilde, we're going get rid of that too. The name of the game
here is get this to a small set of equations. We have equations that characterize
optimization by people, but we need the aggregate
consistency conditions here that we don't have. We have individual optimization, but I don't have anything that looks like a
resource constraint. I don't have anything
like the restriction across prices and
stuff like that. By the way, one of the
things that's tricky about this model is that there is no aggregate
resource constraint, which is the regrettable thing. There is not a simple
relationship like for example, that y_t is equal
to e to the a times n. We don't have something called aggregate production
function in this model. What I mean by an aggregate
production function is an equation that relates aggregate outputs as a function just of
aggregate input. Why don't we have that? Well, as I said earlier, the distribution
of inputs matters. If this economy was
efficiently organized, we would never contemplate
the possibility of unequally distributing
labor across sectors, but because we have these
price-setting frictions, that will happen all the time. The prices of intermediate goods that are low are going
to attract more labor, prices of intermediate goods
that are high are going to attract less labor and so
that would be all the time. That would be the
relationship if all the laborers were
allocated equally everywhere, but in practice,
they will not be, and so that is not, for example, the production
function in this model. Let's get into this stuff. Let's talk about the
price relationship here. We got a problem
here because we have an infinity of
prices and infinity of variable is not a good
idea with this sort of stuff. If you look at this infinity, you can see that
there's a subset of the i's associated with firms that optimize and then there's the other subset or the
ones that don't optimize. Now, the beauty of
the optimizer ones is that they are all
setting the same price. This is just a constant
times the fraction of those people that they are, but this is one nightmare
looking thing because this thing will have a
whole distribution of prices in it because there's some people that changed
their price yesterday. They all have one
price yesterday. There are other people
who haven't changed their prices for two periods. They will have a different
price and so on. The ones that don't
change their price, they come in every shade
and color and size. Sorry. The first substitution here comes down to there and the real issue
is this one here. In principle, when you
have models like this, you actually have to
characterize the distribution of those prices because that will matter for what
that integral is, and then you also have to
characterize the law of motion for those prices as it goes from one period to the
next and how it's perturbed by
realizations of shocks. That's the problem, in principle, you would face. However, and this is why I guess the name Calvo
gets attached to this stuff, is that there's something very
simple about those prices, which is they were
drawn literally at random from the population
of prices yesterday. The whole Calvo price
stickiness mechanism is a random mechanism. No matter who you are, your probability of
getting your price being allowed to optimize or not optimize your price is the same, which sounds like a
terrible assumption, but it delivers thing because what that integral
is doing is you're integrating over a
random selection of people from the population. Let's take as an example. Suppose we go to a
large population, India or China and
there's a distribution in those countries
of men by height. There's a true distribution
of men by height. Now, once I go to China and I pick 200 million Chinese males totally at random and I ask, what is the distribution of
those males, their height? Well, how does that compare to the actual Chinese distribution? It's basically the same. If I had been selecting, I'm only going to
choose males that are four months old or there's
some selection thing, but no, if you take them totally randomly and the
ones you select, they have the same distribution. The distribution of
the P_is that are in that integral is the same as the distribution of all the
prices in the previous period because people are randomly selected to be stuck
with their old price. That's fundamentally
the reason why that integral looks a lot like the same integral of
yesterday's prices, i.e. yesterday's price. This is what that
integral looks like, although you have to
shrink it down by Theta. Now, normally, I would have 17 more
slides to explain this, but that's the basic insight, is because of the random price setting that this equation here, which is a nightmare, this aggregate price equation up there is one
nightmare equation. It's not clear how you're
going to integrate that into your computer program
because these people were randomly selected to not be allowed to
change their price, that integral turns out to boil down to just
yesterday's price. Now, we only have two
different distinct variables, P tilde and P. Now, I'll do a little division. This linear
homogeneous equation, divide, no problem, and boom, I got an expression in terms
of the inflation rates and non-linear expression
in terms of the inflation rate and the price of the
price setter guys. There's a simple connection
between those people. Now, this is the thing for
the price relationship. Let's have a look at output. Technically, as I said before, there's no aggregate production
function in this model. There's no rule that says, we got this many inputs, this is how much aggregate
output you're going to get. There is no such equation. You don't know by knowing how many people are working
what output is going to be, and that's because of
the price frictions. Now, Tak Yun wrote a paper in the JME which explained
what I'm now going to show, wonderfully simple
argument that he made. Although, it can't
be that simple, because when he first
did this thing, there were people who were
whispering, he has mistake. Mistake. That mistake, yeah, told you. He didn't actually get a lot of action on the job market. Actually hurt him big time. That's a mistake and rumors. People initially
couldn't understand what the hell he
was talking about. But now his name
is in bold print. I'm going to describe his argument for you and
you're going to wonder, why would even smart people say that there was something wrong with what Tak Yun did? Now he did this in a much more general setting with capital and stuff but the basic logic is no different for
what I'm doing here. Anyway what Tak Yun was, he derived the
aggregate relationship between outputs and inputs to take into account
the fact that you need to know something
about distributions. What he did was he said, okay, let's just define this
crazy variable Y star. No real economist would actually talk about
something like Y star because notice I'm adding up over the
intermediate inputs. These are different
goods and I'm not weighting by the prices. It seems like a mistake
right off the bat. But let me do that anyway. I'm integrating over the prices. Of course, this is a
wonderfully simple relationship because if I substitute in
the production function, this thing really is a times n because I'm just
adding over everybody. On the other hand, that's
not aggregate output, it's not adding over things the aggregate
output doesn't add, it adds weighted by prices or it adds through
the CES function, whichever you want to do,
it's the same actually. Then the next thing
I do is I take the demand curve and I substitute out that the YI in
terms of the demand curve. Then I get, again, I shouldn't
cough too loud because I blow your ears
out a little bit. Then I take the demand curve and substitute that out and I
write this in that form. The next thing is, I'm going to define
this object as P star. The actual expression for the aggregate price index looks a lot like this
crazy thing here, except it has a different power. I'm going to call
this thing P star. This looks like the thing,
but it's not the same. It's a different
weighted average of all the price is P star. This thing will have
the same law of motion. This is Mr. Calvo
steps in over here. This weighted integral involves a fixed number of
things on one hand, but then all the non changing
prices on the other hand. But the Calvo insight
still works and we get a very simple expression
for Mr. P star here. If we go over here now and turn this stuff
around a little bit because y is the
variable of interest, Y star is something that only a non economists
would ever think of doing because it's adding up
things, apples and oranges. Turn it around and you
get this expression here. Then express this as a little
lowercase p and presto. Now what you've got is
a relationship between aggregate output and
aggregate inputs that's distorted by something and that something has to do with
differences in prices. What does that mean? Well,
look at the numerator, it's one weighted average
of all the prices. The denominator is a different weighted average
of all the prices. What you can show is that
all the prices are the same, by the way the linear
homogeneous averages. If all the prices are the same, then P star over p is 1. If there's any difference
among the prices, now this part is not so obvious. Then the P star over
P is less than 1. P star over P is a function. This little P star guy is a function of the
distortions among prices and it has this feature here that it's always
less than or equal to 1. It looks a little bit
like I don't know. You guys have
probably heard, no, you could almost surely have
not heard of Okun's gap. No one here. Has anybody here ever heard of
somebody named Okun? No. You don't want to
admit that though. You have to be a little
older to know about Okun. Okun's gap, see. In fact, this corresponds
to an idea that people used to have all the time and it seems to me it's
still a good idea. I don't know why
they got rid of it. There was an idea about
economics that the way economies work is they try going
along and they're efficient and boom, all
of sudden they go down. Then they come back up
again and then boom, the Great Depression
was viewed as an exam. That's why they do
trend through peaks. Has anybody ever heard
of trend through peaks? You calculate potential GDP
by doing an envelope of actual GDP and that idea that the economy is normally
traveling along okay. Then those drops that we see are inefficiencies actually fits in nicely with that whole thing. Bob King used to call that
the Okun's gap variable. The problem is that in fact
it doesn't move very much. When you actually plug in
plausible parameter values, it doesn't move very much, but it's an interesting
thing, the inefficiency, it's a one-sided inefficiency, can only go down and
it has a max of one. Let's bring these
equations together. Let me say, I'm
going to give you a bunch of equations here. Here's that Number 1. I'm going to give you
six equations that characterize the private
sector equilibrium. Equation Number 1 is the numerator in the price
setter guy equation. Equation Number 2 is the
denominator in that equation. Equation Number 3
is this thing here. Remember this is p tilde
equals that thing there. I'm going to get rid of p
tilde and replace it by k over f because we got that from the
first-order condition. The first-order condition
of the firm setters gives you one
relationship for p tilde. Then the cross price restriction gives you another relationship for p tilde the
substitute amount, you get this as k
over f is equal to this thing here that
involves inflation. Another equation here
is the P star equation. You get that from here. By manipulating this
thing here you get a nice little recursive
expression in the nominal prices. Then by just dividing by big P and converting this
to the little p guy, you end up with this equation here for
the price distortions. This is a law of motion
for the price distortions. It's an absolute miracle. You don't need to
know anything about the distribution of prices
among individual people. All I need to know is
I need to know what yesterday's price
distortions were. I need to know what the
current inflation rate is and that tells me what today's
price distortions are. You see there's nothing else in that expression there besides inflation and lagged
price distortions. Maybe you can also see that if pi bar is the
aggregate inflation, it's a gross inflation rate. If there's no inflation, that pi bar is equal to 1. Maybe it's too much to see. But that's a stable
difference equation. If there's no inflation, eventually the price
distortions go away. But they can't go
away right away. But they will eventually
go away because eventually everybody gets
to change their prices. Eventually, what will happen is that see when there's no inflation then suppose
nobody has changed. Suppose all the prices are the same and there's no inflation. Well then all the prices
will remain the same. If the prices are different and there's no inflation then the adjusters will be moving in the direction of
making all the prices the same and eventually
become the same. Okay, whatever. Here's
the inter-temporal, a condition for the
households and there's the aggregate inputs
and outputs and boom, we now have six equations
in eight unknowns, which is actually a little
bit disappointing because it sounds like it's
too few equations. But it's not disappointing. Because Number 1, notice I've included new as an unknown, which is crazy because I already told you it
was 1 minus Epsilon. I actually, I over-counted
the number of equations. Does it bother you that
we're short one equation? Lawrence Christian:
Suppose this was six equations and six unknowns. Would that bother you?
It will bother me, because I haven't
said something. This is an economy
with an interest rate, I haven't said even
about monetary policy. There's a relationship I've left out of the stink and big. It can't possibly be closed. There's another equation
that's knocking at the door and wants
to come in too. If we could solve the model
without that equation, that will be a sad thing
for that equation. It's actually not surprising, that's six equations
in eight unknowns. Number 1, and I'm not sure why I left the new in
there as an unknown. I know why I left it in as unknown you'll see in a second. Number 2, it's clear that
I've left out something. Monetary policy or
something like that. I've left that out because I got this nominal interest rate here. The system in effect is
still under determined, but it's not under
determined because I forgot something about
the private sector. The private sector is
a closed system here. We got equations and variables. It's under determined because of something on the outside
that I left out. In some sense, we have two
policy variables here, the interest rate and new. I'm going to now
describe two ways to pin down those two
policy variables. I'm going to pin them down
by supposing that policy is chosen optimally
and the other way, I'm going to suppose is that policy is follow some
rule like a Taylor rule. Now it's going to turn
out that I need as an input to my Taylor rule, I need something
called the output gap and that will
involve optimal policy. In order to even think
about the Taylor rule, I'm going to have to think about the optimal policy first. We're going to do that now. Now we're going to talk
about Ramsey optimal policy. I now have an economy, I've completely characterized the private sector
equilibrium conditions. But I have one or two degrees of freedom depending
on how you count, whether it's include
the new or not, the two degrees of freedom. You got eight variables
and six equations, it's like you have
multiple equilibria. You know what I mean, there's
like many settings for the eight variables that
satisfy the six equations. What optimal policy is, is it's the setting for
the variables that's best among all the
possible settings. I guess this is what
I'm saying here. So the Ramsey optimal
thing is to choose the six variables to maximize utility but satisfy
the eight variables. I guess you can't do that, well, you can but this is
cheating in some sense. I know people who
would not do this. They would say it's
wrong to change that. Once you put that six there, you have to suffer
the consequences. Anyway, so it's eight. You have eight variables
and there's a space, so think about an
amoeba if I would draw a big thing and there's a space of possible values
of those eight variables, which is defined by the six
equations and I'm going to go looking in that space for the best setting for
those variables. We'll define that problem as a simple Lagrangian
problem. There it is. So the Ramsey problem is, to try to get the
highest utility, go hunting through this space
of possible settings for the eight variables to find the setting for those variables that has the highest utility. You see the max there,
there's eight variables over there and I'm maximizing utility subject to
my six equations. My sixth private
sector equilibria, and that's called
the Ramsey problem. By the way, this is
the way although I mentioned this wants to
[inaudible] and he denied it, but I'm going to
claim it and he's not here now to deny it. [inaudible] does this
at the Riggs bank. He takes the Taylor
rule out of here. If you have a Taylor
rule in your back pocket when you walk into Riggs bank, they have a special Taylor
rule detector when you go and they will remove
it from your pocket. You're not allowed in the
building with a Taylor rule. So their systems are
under-determined, and so the way they
compute policy, the way they solve the model, models, is they solve
models this way. No Taylor rule is
allowed in the picture, so the systems are fundamentally underdetermined and so
when they solve a model, they're finding the solution
to the Ramsey problem. Although, not with one major
provisory which is that, the utility function of the agents in the model is
not what's used up there. The analog of the
Governing Council at the Riggs Bank is
put up there instead. They're picking in the set of all the possible equilibria, the one they privately prefer the most and that may not be the same as the representative
agent's utility function. By the way, is there
a rationale for that? I'll give you a hint. It begins with the letter R, but that's too difficult. So the next letter is O, rule. I'll give you three
letters, R-O-G, Rog. R-O-G-O. Speaker 1: Rogoff [inaudible]. Lawrence Christian: Yes. Rogoff. So that perspective on policy is that it's actually a desirable thing for reasons that are not
included on this slide, to appoint a central
banker who does not have exactly the same preferences as the public and it's
a desirable thing to have that central
banker at work, in your central bank. In any event, I don't know what Lance [inaudible] view about
this, but in any event, what they do and the
Monetary Policy Committee is that they in effect
have to figure out a way to aggregate their
preferences and it's actually an interesting
discussion exactly, how do they do that and they do it in a very interesting
and intelligent way. They'll write down. Then it's not technically a Ramsey problem because Ramsey always refer specifically to the social
welfare function up there, but it's mechanically of
course the same thing. You're maximizing
some criterion, slapping on multipliers on all the equilibrium
conditions that are given to you by private economy, optimization,
market-clearing, etc. Notice we're putting in
the actual equations here, including tachyons
adjustment down here, and including of course, also the law of motion
of that adjustment. There is one constraint in
here which is so stupid, you just have to get rid of it, which is the linear
constraint on the resource on that C, that's just the
linear constraint. Anybody who solves things, they'd see a linear constraint
that's odd to hear. Anything linear is out, so I just substitute it out. See here, we've got the N, there's the N and the P-star because it was log C up there. Then everywhere this
thing is written, you got all this stuff going on. Actually a more sensible
way of thinking the problem is this way. So this is a Ramsey
optimal policy problem. This problem has actually quite a maybe
shockingly simple solution, which actually gives
us a little bit of insight into the
whole model here. So for example, look at the
first equation, Lambda 1. Let me ask you the question. Is that a binding restriction? Is there something about Lambda 1 that inhibits the ability of this problem to
maximize the criterion. Notice that inside Lambda
1 is a variable RT. Notice the variable
shows up nowhere else. It's not in the
utility function, it's not in any of
the other equations. So somebody who is maximizing
this thing would say, Lambda 1 that's a stupid
constraint because I can always choose RT to just
make that equal to 0. In particular, we expect
that Lambda 1 is 0. We expect that it's
non-binding on that problem. Now let's have a little peek at some of the other equations. For example, Lambda 3. You might conjecture
that Lambda 3 is also non-binding because
you can just use it to define F, what the hell? F, well, it does appear
somewhere else there. But we can make Lambda
5 non binding too. The P-star equation, not obvious that'll be non
by, in fact it's binding. In fact, intuitively is binding. If I see that there are big
distortions in prices today, can I achieve the no
distortion state tomorrow? Say if I'm the
monetary authority? Yes or no? The answer is no. Why? The answer is, that's 150 zillion
targets you're after. If you want to make
all prices the same, that means you got to make this price equal to that
price equal to that price. That's too many
targets and there's only two degrees of freedom
in this system R and new. You can't. The P-star intuitively, it has to be binding thing, but it has to be
bidding because it also restricts how much
you get to consume. So P-star matters. It's in the utility function and so on. By the way, one of these
times I'm going off, so I might as well say goodbye now because I won't
have the opportunity. Lawrence Christiano: We
can conjecture that we can think of the Lambda_1
is simply defining r, the guy there
defining f. Lambda_4, we can just think of
that as defining Nu. Then you might say, Nu
is a constant, fine. Make Nu a function of t.
Think about Nu as a function. It'll turn out that Nu
being a constant was just. Conjecture would
be that actually this problem boils
down to this thing. This problem boils
down to that thing. That it's that
optimization problem and that's a staggering problem. Because notice, first of all, there's nothing forward-looking
in that problem, which tells me that the Ramsey optimal policy is probably going to be
time consistent in this. There's no forward-looking variable, so there's no reason to say, "I'm going to do this in
the future," and then not do it because there's no forward-looking
variable that you're influencing by any
such announcement. Any event there's the maximum. Now, you can think of
this as a conjecture. I'm conjecturing that all
those multipliers are zero, and then we could verify
ex-post and in fact, that conjecture was correct. By the way, if we go
back to this thing, are there any
circumstances where you think it's obvious that ex-post that conjecture
was not correct? Yeah. Speaker 2: [inaudible] Lawrence Christiano:
That's exactly the one that I had in mind. Now, I don't have the
inequality constraint on there. I probably should
have written it in and then it would
have been true that, that might have been
a binding constraint. In effect, I was assuming the zero bound are really
not very relevant, which it isn't in
a neighborhood of the steady state of
any reasonable model where you'd have 2.5 percent inflation so the
nominal interest rate will be 2.5 percent higher than
the real interest rate. But you're totally right
that, that's a little bit. If you were solving the model, you would want to
check to make sure that you're computing
positive interest rates. If you're not, then you
have to slap that on as an extra constraint and
then actually life gets more hard than what
I'm about to do here. This is a very simple
optimization problem. Calculate the
first-order conditions. You end up with
this and then you do a little bit of
scrambling around. You get this simple
little law of motion for the price distortion and then you end up in the end with
this simple solution. This is the solution to the Ramsey optimal
problem in this case, which is that the
price distortions evolve in this particular way. The inflation rate is not
going to be zero right away. What happens is that, well, the price distortions are
going up towards one, obviously they're not
going to go down. That will be weird. Why would you get
crazier or something? Any event, we're going to go
up from low to high to one, they're going to
asymptote to one. But the fact that
they're rising means that the inflation rate is, tomorrow is higher than today, but tomorrow is in the basement, so the inflation rate
it's going up from below. It's very hard for me to
think up, down, sideways. I'm much more straightforward. Positive number, I can't think of numbers
in denominators. P is bigger than P minus 1. Whatever. You can
figure this out. There's a definite
implications for inflation. The level of employment
is that thing there. By the way, that's an
interesting result that the level of employment
is that thing there, because this is the first
best level of employment. You can easily work
out that if you bring in a plan here who
never heard of markets, who never heard of
private ownership, who never heard of any
this thing will only sees utility functions
and production functions, that planner would
choose that thing there. Notice the planner does
not involve responding to technology shocks because income and substitution
effects cancel here. Then they do respond to negative preference shocks
because people get backaches, it's a good idea for
them not to do that. The solution to this
problem involves setting the subsidy in the way
I did earlier anyway, and then consumption is
equal to this expression, and eventually asymptotically, consumption will be equal to it's efficient level
because asymptotically, the solution to
the Ramsey problem involves getting rid of the
price frictions altogether. Can't get rid of
it in one period because there's
too many targets, but over time, you
can get rid of it. Here's a simulation of
this law of motion here I started at the P
star equal to 0.8, and then I simulated
it up and it's monotonically stable converging thing up to the number 1. The solution to the
Ramsey problem does not involve going to zero
inflation instantaneously, and it does not
involve getting rid of price distortions
and instantaneously, but it involves getting rid of those things asymptotically. When you get there
asymptotically, you get to the first best
level of consumption, you're always at the first
best level of employment. I'm going to refer to
the Ramsey allocations as the natural things. The equilibrium of the Ramsey is the natural equilibrium. Among people, there's
a difference there. Some people like to call the natural equilibrium as the flexible price equilibrium. Anyway, I'm referring it to
as the natural equilibrium. The natural equilibrium is
the Ramsey equilibrium. What I mean by that is that the natural equilibrium
is what you would get if you had optimal
monetary policy. Not what you get if you
have flexible prices, because flexor prices, that's
part of the technology. I don't want to ask, what would the world be like if we
had flexible prices? Because that's part
of the technology. If I was allowed to
play with technology, I might as well say make
the endowment contract because they liked get rid
of the production function. Why don't we have to work
so hard all the time? This define natural output as what you get from
an endowment economy. Well, of course that's goofy, but getting rid of
sticky prices is analogously goofy because
it's a reduced form thing, but it's a reduced
form for something. Just assuming it goes away,
I'm not sure what that means. I'm defining a natural
equilibrium as the equilibrium that's
associated with the efficient monetary policy. It's an achievable
equilibrium and so on. The fun thing about this is
that it's time consistent. There is nothing about the Ramsey optimal
policy in this model, that would make the planner
later if they re-optimize, come up with a
different decision. Basically, because the
binding constraints are only forward-looking in this
thing or put differently, there's two distortions, and there's two policies,
you can nail them. There's no advantage
to surprising people. Time inconsistency comes from advantages to fooling people, but there's no advantage to
that here because they're two instruments
are enough to get them to the efficient outcome. If we had sticky wages then the Ramsey problem is not
time consistent anymore. I guess I should pay
attention to the time. What time do we break for lunch? Now, that has to be a
binding constraint. Here are the equations for the New Keynesian model under
the Ramsey optimal policy, the natural equilibrium and I've written them in log form. N star is the log of employment. It's equal to this. The natural equilibrium has a wonderful property in this model that it's
independent of a, and that will be very
useful for intuition later. It's a very useful benchmark. It's a property of the
fact that I've assumed balanced growth preferences
here and that there's no intertemporal
technology so that the cancellation of income
and substitution effects, which with capital, would
only occur asymptotically, happens every period in at least in the
efficient equilibrium. N is a function
only of back pain, not of a, of little a, and then this is
output is a function of little a because n is
not a function of little a, so output responds one for one with a but then, of course, it also responds to back
pain because people are working less when
they have back pain. Now, in the natural equilibrium, remember the natural
equilibrium is an actual market equilibrium. We can define market
prices and inflation. Those are well-defined things in the Ramsey equilibrium
so there's also going to be an intertemporal. All the equations
are satisfied here, and there's a linear
representation of the intertemporal Euler equation in the natural equilibrium, in the Ramsey optimal
equilibrium, is that thing there. It's the same thing
that we got in the first diagram
a long time ago, the first slide a long time ago although I didn't
have stars on stuff. Actually, I think I
had c over there. But now, c and y are
the same thing in the natural equilibrium
because I'm imagining enough time has gone by so
the P star is equal to 1. In the natural equilibrium
at the very beginning, P star is not equal to 1, but I imagine that
time has gone by enough so P star is equal to 1. That's c and y are the same thing in the
natural equilibriums. Inflation is, I see, I've got the phrase eventually, I'm assuming we're in
the eventual situation. Now we can get a very
simple expression for the natural
rate of interests. The natural rate of interest is the interest rate in
the Ramsey equilibrium. By just substitute
alpha y star here, now that's just
exogenous variables, and we have one
endogenous variable here, our star, we can now
solve for r star. There it is. R star is equal
to that crazy thing there. Now, that expression is wildly
important in this model. If you look at r star, notice that it's positively
related to Delta a. If the growth rate of
technology is positive today, it means that r star
is going up. Why? What's the intuitive
reason for that? Our star is the interest rate. That's the net nominal
interest rate, which will cost the same in the natural equilibrium as the net real interest
rate because inflation is zero in the natural
because we're assuming that the initial
period is gone by. Our star is the nominal
or the real way, whatever you want
to think about in the natural equilibrium. Why would it be related
positively to Delta a? Well, because I've assumed that Delta a is positively
out of correlated. If there's a positive
Delta a today it means that A is going to
be higher in the future. But in this economy c
is proportional to a. As a goes up c goes
along with it. If people see a big
Delta a it means they're seeing big
consumption in the future. But that's the future,
not the present. It's like you're
approaching Christmas time. That means you can open your
presence in the future, but you're not supposed
to open them today. Consumption today is equal to today's a not tomorrow's a. You might want to consume more, you're going to have
more A in the future, you might want to
consume more today, but that's not the
efficient thing to do. Oh, why not? Why isn't it efficient to open your presents before Christmas? In this model, if a is higher in the future it means
the productivity of labor is higher in the future. If you try to consume
more today like in the future why is
that not a good idea? Speaker 3: Because you
have to work more. Lawrence Christiano:
You have to work more. It's not very efficient today because a didn't go up
today it went up tomorrow. That's what we're talking
about. Our star has to be high in order to discourage people from doing this
inefficient thing. Because of log utility they want to go to the bank and
borrow and so on. But the efficient thing
when we're talking about the efficient
equilibrium here is to discourage that by
raising the interest rate. By the way, that interest
rate is very important because if you think about the monetary authorities as their policy is picking
the interest rate, well, our star is really the thing that if they did it they would
achieve the right thing. That our star has a
very special status. In central banks at some level that's all anybody
ever talks about. They may not use that language, but they're always saying,
oh, what should I do with the interest rate?
What does that mean? Well, one way of thinking
about what that means is where's the natural rate to which I should be setting
my interest rate to? Now notice here that Tau
Lambda is less than one. Tau is a negative coefficient. What the heck's that all about? Well, when Tau jumps then
consumption is going to be low. Where does Tau go in
the future if it jumps? Tau is assumed to be a first-order
autoregressive process. If it jumps it comes down again, it's going to dissipate
as opposed to a. If a goes up it keeps
on rising because it's Delta a that's
positively autocorrelated. But Tau is a stationary thing so when it goes up
it will come down, which means that when
my consumption goes down is going up in the future. Did I say 1 minus Tau Lambda
is a negative number? I think I did say that. But it's not, it's
a positive number. Because Lambda is a number that's less than one
in absolute value. It's a positive number, 1 minus lambda is positive. Why would you raise the
interest rate when Tau goes up? When Tau goes up today
consumption is low today, but where is it today
compared to tomorrow? But tomorrow they're not going
to have so much back pain, so consumption in the
future will be higher. We're going off a low base, but still by comparison. People want to bring that future higher consumption
to the present so you have to raise
the interest rate to get the efficient allocation. Because the efficient allocation involve low consumption today, high consumption in the future, not efficient to
consume a lot today. Why? Because people
have back pain, they don't want to
work. It's painful. Not a good time to raise
consumption. It's inefficient. Now I've described the natural
thing and natural stuff. You can think of
natural output will be y star and the natural
rate of interests. These are all the objects
in the natural equilibrium. Now we go back to the
New Keynesian model with a Taylor rule and put
everything together. I'm going to rig up
the Taylor rule so that in the steady state
inflation is going to be zero. I'm going to rig it so that if you turn off all the shocks the Taylor rule will deliver a zero inflation
rate asymptotically. Of course, if we have a zero
inflation asymptotically and we set our new the way I
said we're going to set it, then what happens is that
asymptotically we have an efficient
equilibrium that has big advantages technically which I don't
want to talk about. I could talk about
it this afternoon if we did the Ramsey
optimal policy, but we're not going to
do it this afternoon. We could discuss it
separate outside. I'm going to rig
the Taylor rule and the new thing in such a way that asymptotically if you
turn off the shocks in the model it's going to go to
the efficient equilibrium. All the problems are
going to have to do with responses to shocks. Now we get the famous
New Keynesian IS curve. We know that in the
actual equilibrium the log linear approximation to the intertemporal
Euler equation is given by that
thing over there. We derive that from
the first period, except in there I had not y, but c. I had not y but
c, but it's consumption. Consumption comes out of the inner temporal
order equation because it's the
marginal utility of consumption that's in it. The derivation many slides
ago had y not c. Now, is there a difference
between y and c in the actual equilibrium? No. There's nothing
else to do with output other than consumer.
They're the same thing. When we derived it for c before we did it for y as well
because c is equal to y. That's the basic
resource constraint. Where things get
confusing is when you relate y to aggregate inputs. In the natural
equilibrium we get that equation over there. That's the Euler equation. Inflation is zero. You don't see it in there. Now subtract the two. Boom. There we get one of the standard equations in
the New Keynesian model, which is you get the output gap, you get an intertemporal
Euler equation in the output gap. It has this funny natural
rate hiding inside of it. Well, it's happening because we took the
difference of the two. Often analyses of the
New Keynesian model will begin with this equation. Just write this thing
down in terms of the gap natural
rate of interest, but we didn't do that. No, we couldn't do that.
That would be too easy. If we look now at the output in the New
Keynesian equilibrium, the aggregate output
relationship, of course, in the equilibrium y is equal to log of p
star plus n plus a, where p star is the thing that
we've been talking about. Now, this deserves a little bit of
discussion, this p star. I don't have a diagram
to do this so you're going to have to
visualize this thing. On the horizontal axis I've
got price distortions, on the vertical axis
I've got p star. Wait. Do I have a
picture of this? I don't think I do. No, I was planning to draw this. Distortions are over here and then in the middle there's no distortions where are the prices
are the same. At that point p star
is equal to one. Then as I go away from
one the thing comes down. It's a mountain like that. Now, in this model in the steady-state what are
the price distortions? The Taylor rule makes inflation zero in the steady state. What are the price
distortion is going to be in the steady state? Suppose that everybody
kept their prices constant, is that feasible? Yes. Because the idiots
weren't changing their prices. Well, they're not
changing their prices. The clever people who aren't changing their prices
what are they doing? They're not changing
their prices either. If you have zero
aggregate inflation, because the non optimizers are doing zero inflation
on their own prices, in that case, all the
prices will be the same. If we think about this diagram, where are we in
the steady state? In the steady state we're at the point where
there's no inflation. We're at the top
of this mountain. Vertical axis is p star. Then if you have a
memory like mine if you see something it's
gone almost immediately. Gold fish apparently I
remember it three seconds. When I draw this figure, if you're like me you see it, but as soon as my hand
is done it's gone. In actual fact, it is gone because it's just
in the space there. Anyway, there's p
star over here, and then there's the
distortions here, and at zero distortions
here at the top, and then you come
down both ways. No matter what's happening
in the distortions, whether they go this
way, that way, whatever they're always coming down. Now, I'm going to give
you a little hint. Mr. Tolkien he said that the relationship
between distortions and the p star is differentiable. Suppose I have a curve that reaches a top over here as differentiable, it comes down over there, what's the slope of it there? Zero. Suppose I do a first-order approximation of that curve there
in steady-state? It's a straight line. The slope is zero, it's just
a constant term. If you do first-order
approximation, because we're assuming that
the non optimizers are not changing their prices and the steady-state
inflation rate is zero because of that one thing, because the price distortions are efficient at
the steady-state, the P star to a first-order
approximation is just equal to one and
is not changing. It's not changing
in a neighborhood. Now if we change any one
of those assumptions, like if we made inflation
2.5 percent per year and we made the non-optimizers
not change their prices, well then the
steady-state will be over here and the slope, there will be a slope there and then you would have the
P star will be a living, breathing biological
creature that evolves and has
to be included in your equations but as long
as you're supposing that in the steady-state there
are no price distortions to a first-order approximation, you can pretend that it's
always equal to one. Now by the way, you
might want to check that. How would you check that? Well, you just type in the non-linear equations
that we did here. Go to Dynare, do a
second-order approximation, see if it makes any
difference and I tell you right away what the
answer is going to be. It makes no difference for the types of fluctuations you
see in the United States. The first-order stuff really is first-order and the second-order stuff actually is second-order. To a first-order approximation,
we can ignore this. By the way, let
me say something, when we do Ramsey, I can't do that. Now we have a simple in this
first-order approximation, I have this, this is my
resource constraint. I now actually have an
aggregate production function. I guess I can write y as a direct function of
the aggregate labor and the aggregate technology. Then there's this whole
nightmare of equations here associated
with price setting. You've got the numerator,
the denominator, get all those equations
associated with price-setting, you sit down and you take a linear approximation
to all those equations. Take out a big soup
spoon and you stir. It might take you several days because you're going to
make so many mistakes. You'll make more mistakes, more than there are
lines on the page. Anyway, you keep on stirring
and stirring and stirring. You keep stirring
and eventually, you're going to start
asymptoting to this. This is the expression here. This is the standard
little guy here and the amazing thing is
that this guy doesn't that prices are
efficient in the stea just come out of nowhere,
it comes out of here. One of the things
that's vital in the derivation there isdy-state. So if you have an
inflation rate that you have the non-optimizers are raising their prices by
that inflation rate, that's crucial for
this derivation here. Anyway, what do we
get out of this? So far we got this
little guy here. We call this the IS curve, then we have an aggregate
output relationship because we're doing a
first-order approximation which allows me to set P star
equal to 1 so the log of P star is 0 and then I do the linear
approximation on that. This, of course, takes
a little bit of work. It's not obvious
by looking at it, but you do it and you end
up with this expression. Well, I guess there's
a derivation here on this handout and then
here's my Taylor rule. The Taylor rule, this is in log. The thing at the
left-hand side is the interest rate in
the actual equilibrium. It's a net interest rate equals Alpha times the
interest rate and then you have, this is Pi. I guess you can read this too. Then this thing here
is the output gaps. I'm imagining they're
looking at the output gap. This is a standard thing
that people write. I must say, I have no
idea what they mean by this because if you knew
what the output gap was, then you could probably
calculate what the natural rate of
interest was and you wouldn't have to
do any of this Taylor baloney but any event. At the top output
gap in their feet. To compute the output gap, I need to know what the
efficient level of output is in the economy and it's not obvious how to
figure that one out. Here are the equations. If you go back and look at the equations that I had
at the very beginning, I had six equations
and eight variables. One of the eight
variables I nailed by just making new efficient. All of those equations
have been worked with in order to get down
to these equations here. This Phillips curve
actually summarizes a whole bunch the equations
on this earlier page. This is three
equilibrium relations are summarized by
this Phillips curve. Of course, we substituted out f and we got rid of a
bunch of variables. Oh my God. I didn't know that
letter G does not. There's the policy rule, the IS equation, and then
this is the natural. One thing that's fun
and surprising about this thing or there's a bunch of things about this
that are weird. Let me just tell you
because none of you know about real business
cycle models, probably. Me, I think of that
as the standard model but slowly as time goes
by, no one remembers. Like the dinosaurs, who remembers the
dinosaurs anymore now? No one. Same thing with a real
business cycle model. Anyway, a real
business cycle model has three equilibrium
conditions. There's the intertemporal Euler equation, resource constraint, and maybe the labor equation if you have that equation
in there, three equations. Those three equations, you
could completely describe and discuss them in
about 34 seconds. After 34 seconds, you're
just repeating yourself. There's just nothing there. It's like just trivial stuff. This thing here, I actually didn't even do
all the talking I could do without repeating myself
to derive these equations. It's three equations.
Well, it's actually four. It's four equations, but there's an immense amount of stuff
behind these equations. Anyway, I'm not sure
why I said that, but I just did so it's too late. There's another interesting
thing about this, which is that in the model
there are two shocks, Tau and A, and if you look inside here, you look at the actual
equations the Phillips curve, IS equation, you don't
seem to see it anywhere. Where the hell are those things? They're all sneaking in
through this little R-star. I can't tell you why I
find that interesting I'll admit but it's a weird thing. You'd have thought it come
in a more blatant way, but they're all
coming in through the natural rate of
interest in this model. Now that I said I
realized it's not a very interesting remark. I wish I hadn't said
it, but it's too late. Now let's solve this model. We don't have to linearize it anymore because we
already linearized it. When you work with Dynare, you'd actually type in
the actual equations and well actually, this afternoon we'll type in
these linearized equation. Well, we won't type them in because I already
typed them in for you but we'll have
these equations here. I'm pretty sure that
Jesus will have examples. Yeah, he has a real business
cycle model example so he's going to have the
actual equations and then Dynare will do
the linearization. We're going to plug
these things in. We have the actual equations, so we don't have to
linearize them anymore. Well, we did linearize
them. But now I want to set them
up and solve them. I'll use this canonical notation that I used at the beginning, well at the end of the
previous lecture or whatever, and here it is. I took all the equations
and I write them. These are the variables
whose values are determined at a time
t. This here is z_t, inflation output gap, r-star, all of these things,
and this is t plus 1. Then we also have
some shocks in here, s these are the
exogenous shocks. This is the law of motion. This guy here is
this equation here. Now what I want to do is
I want to find a solute. There it is. The whole system is there. That upper equation is all the equations on the previous slide and then you have the law of
motion for the shocks. Now the solution
is a matrix A and matrix B that satisfy the
equations I put up before. Now there's one thing
that's fun about this, which is that if we go back
and look at this system, notice that there's
one equation here. It's got this one
lonely little guy. In fact, if you look at this, you'd think this is all zeros. You wouldn't even notice that. After you notice
them, you realize he's there feeling bad and lonely because
absent this one thing, it's all a bunch of zeros. In particular, if we
look at this system here, this Alpha_2 here, if we set Alpha to zero, this Alpha_2 would be equal to zero and if you look at this, can you see, can
you see a solution? If Alpha_2 is zero, how many people in
this room would need a computer to find a
solution to this thing? A equals 0 is a solution
in that case which makes sense because the
system is so profoundly non, what is it,
internally dynamic or something because there's
nothing in the economics. If this Alpha_2 is 0, there's like nothing
backward-looking in this system so it's
not surprising if the solution would not
be backward-looking either. Now you still have to
worry because Mr. Dynare see is a very serious
person and Mr. Dynare, remember what I was saying
is they're going to take that polynomial and they're
going to put it up, they're going to stick
it up all over the wall, all the a's that
satisfy that equation. The fact that you know that
one of the solutions is a equal to 0 doesn't mean
there can't be other ones. We know that a, I shouldn't
say a because that's a. A solution to this thing
is a equals 0 but there may be other solutions we still have to worry about
that possibility. But it's obvious that in
the case where there's no endogenous persistence and if we get rid of the endogenous persistence
in the Taylor rule, where's the Taylor rule here? If we get rid of this guy here, then there's just nothing
that's backward-looking in this system and then a is 0 and then z is simply a function of the current realization
of the shocks and all of the persistence of z and the endogenous
variable that's coming 100 percent from the persistence of the exogenous shocks. 12:15 is the time. 