Neng Wang: This is
a time series over 25 years, from 1990 to 2015, that shows that
alternative assets, by that I mean private
equity, hedge funds, real estate, natural
resources, and etc. The allocations of that have been substantially
increasing, essentially, and public equity allocations
decreasing, and of course, cash and fixed income
have gone way down. Just to make sure, this
is a robust result, whether you cut this, this is a university endowments sample. If you just cut this between public and private universities, the same thing holds. If you cut it based on the
size of the endowment funds, you see a little bit
variations perhaps but, by and large, the
direction is robust, which is allocations to
alternatives have gone way up. As you can see, as you
probably would expect, large endowment funds tend to have a lot bigger
allocation percentage-wise, compared to smaller endowments. These are stylized facts. Now, I just went and
checked the Colombian Yale slightly outdated but and then pulled out one of
the community college. What you can see is
that the standard is 60/40 allocation rule holds
for small endowments, they're only in public equity
and fixed income cash. For Columbia, Yale,
just pick two examples. You can see that
they're heavily exposed to private equity hedge funds, real estate, natural resources. Now, again, just to
make sure you're really convinced in case
you don't see this, if you saw it based
on the top or the bottom decile
and the top decile, the first column
and last column, you see that public equity
has gone is 60 percent for the bottom decile and 32
percent for the top decile size-wise, and you can see that it's, of course, is a
huge crowding out effect, especially fixed
income and cash. Of course, alternatives
have gone way up, as you can see, when you increase the size
of the endowment on average. What do we want to
do in this paper? Very straightforward. We ask the following questions. What is the optimal
asset allocation for long-term investor. Think about
university endowments given liquid alternative
investment opportunities? Now, how do we explain the
cross-section of variations? At least, I want
you to think about this from a conceptual
perspective, in terms of the
asset allocation and spending strategies why
do they differ so much? Obviously, that depends
on investors preferences and depends on their
investment opportunities. We're going to
parameterize the model in the pretty parsimonious way, but try to capture
the key ideas that I think are there and, of course, we care how much
investors would do, how well they do if they invest this way
or alternative ways? These are pretty much
standard questions from portfolio
choice perspective and this is what
the paper is about. The related
literature, of course, is just enormous so, of course, we go back
to Merton Samuelson, and Markowitz and, of course, this is about
alternative investments, we're going to say a
little bit about that. In the theme of this conference, it's about linking
academic research with practice and in particular, we're going to talk about
the endowment model more specifically. Let's go back to
asset allocation 101. Now, this is what we
teach our MBA students. For example, how
would you allocate in a world where you get to choose between
public equity? Think about this as a
diversified market portfolio and risk-free asset. If you just do the standard new Merton Samuelson
portfolio allocation, here's what you're going to get. You'd take the risk premium, let's call it 6 percent and the volatility of equity
markets call it 15/20 percent, and the risk version, the
standard numbers seem to be between 2 and 5 depending
on who you talk to. But anyway, we're going
to stick to two and half, just to round it up so we'll get a very nice 60/40
allocation rule. Why? Because that's what's
often quoted in practice. The way I teach my
students is to say, look where's the 60/40 from? What's from Merton and Samuelson asset
allocation strategy, which is optimal in the
model that they wrote down. Now, just make sure we're
all on the same page in terms of the main features
of the endowment model, not everybody agrees with
every feature on the screen, but I think it's pretty
good first pass. This is often attributed to David Swensen at Yale who's be managing Yale endowments
for over 30 years, I guess. One is investing in equities. The other big idea
is diversification and with exposures to illiquids. The professional
emphasizes quite a bit on what they call value-add, not financial engineering,
not market timing, they tried to seek
opportunities in less efficient market
the idea there is that Alpha or some
risk-adjusted excess return is more likely to happen, of course, in less
efficient markets. They use a lot of
asset managers, especially the Yale
version of the model, where they delegate a lot, they have a lean
office and then they have a lot of professional
managers out there. Now, let me just
dive into the model. The philosophy is very
straightforward as we will see, I'm going to keep a balance between parsimony and realism. I'm going to put the
features that are absolutely essential to get to the
question as a first pass. I'm going to leave
out a bunch of features that I think
are actually important, but we're adding over time. But let me just give
you the main features of the model as we always start so we start with the Merton Samuelson
environment. What do we do? We have a fixed income claim with constant rate of return r, we have public equity, for
now, I'm just going to assume that returns IID. Think about Mu s as the
aggregate stock market return. Risk premium 6 percent
means that you have 6 percent on top of
the risk-free rate r. Then we're going
to just write down a one factor model here
just to keep things simple not because I don't think it's a multi-factor world. Again, just keep the number
of state variables down. Then we're going to
use the Sharpe ratio, which is the excess return
divided by volatility. It's going to be
constant Sharpe ratio world for public equity. Alternative assets.
What do I mean by that? Again, I want the simplest
possible model here. What I do, I want to
write on a return process where if, let's call A
the fundamental value, I'll be more specific
down the road. Think about this as some
fundamental value measure is going to be IID. Now, I intentionally separate
out Mu A and Delta A. Why? Because I need one way for iliquid alternatives to return cash back to investors. Delta A, think about
this as a payout yield. At the per unit of time, the payout will be Delta A times the size of A, and the Sigma A will
be the volatility. Now, of course, public equity and alternatives are correlated, but the correlation is
definitely not one, so, of course, the one thing
you get by investing in alternative assets is you get this diversification
benefit. I'm going to just use Rho
to denote correlation. Very simple. Three assets. Now, let me define, so because it's
one factor model, so think about
this hypothetical, so if you can run a regression so leaving
measurement issue, data issue aside, just think
about this conceptually. If you could run a regression of the alternative asset
on the public market, stock market, and then you
get this Beta coefficients. We're going to call that Beta A, it should be Beta A is the
regression coefficient. It's the span volatility, which is the numerator divided by the stock
market volatility. Now, I'm just going to
mechanically define Alpha as the CAPM, benchmarked Alpha. It doesn't really
mean it's scale, I just be totally clear, it could be the
illiquidity premium it's what it is,
it's the definition. If you think about, you give to some really
talented managers who work really hard on
the optimal contract and collect excess
returns for you, some venture capital investment, things like that that
will be fine too. It's just a mechanical
definition at this stage. That's what we mean by Alpha. It's important to separate
out the total volatility at the alternative asset
level, into two components. One is the span, that
is the part that's correlated with the market and there's a part
that's unspanned. It's very simple, you do
the variance additivity. You take the total
variance, you subtract the systematic
component of variance, you square root of that
so that's Epsilon. Two parameters are
going to be absolutely crucial to the
model's predictions, one is Alpha one is Epsilon. You can think about loosely. You can think about
this as untuitively. Alpha is the benefit
and Epsilon is the cost of allocating to illiquid so we have a trade-off to some extent. Is that clear? By the way, these are all net of
fees so leaving aside the compensation because
Alpha should be net of fees. Now, here comes the key feature. What do we mean by illiquid
alternative investment? I'm going to go with
a very simple model. In my view, at
least this is what I can come up with as
simple as it can ever be. Here's the idea. There
are two ways you can return capital
back to investors. One is you have this,
remember this delta_A, which is a flow variable,
is a float parameter, so it happens continuously just like constant payout rate. Imagine that Yale has a big allocation to
venture capital. Venture capital GPs do provide cash
distributions to Yale, and think about this as
aggregate payout yield from all the alternative asset back to the limited partner. That will be one. There
is another formula of liquidity which I also
call automatic liquidity. These liquidity are automatic in a sense you don't
need to pay anything. Why? Because the fund matures, so the GP writes you a check, say here's how much you earned. There's another form which
is that the fund matures. For example, the
private equity fund that the LP is in matures. At that point, you
don't actually have to put your money back
into the same fund. You can redeploy that, but
that liquidity is lumpy. That's delta_T, where the cap T stands for
the lock-up period. You think about that way
as approximation for that. These are the two forms of
automatic liquidity events. Now, what else can you rebalance your holding of your
illiquid asset? Well, one is you actually go and liquidate certain positions. Think about financial
crisis, there was a secondary market for portfolio company for the
fund investments among LPs. Think about this,
you can liquidate before your investment matures. Another way is, of
course, you can buy more illiquid assets, you can go just acquire. So dL is a liquidation, so that will reduce your total
illiquid asset A holding, and of course, acquisition
will increase that. By the way, the
notation is everything that's in red means negative in terms of
driving the A going down, and the blue is going to
increase the holding of A. Makes sense? Just so that
you get the signs right. These are essentially four ways, I guess to change your A as a holding A
beyond pure shocks. Now, here's a slide with
two accumulation equations. Just make sure every
penny is accounted for. Now, obviously, it's not surprising at all that
you've got to keep track of liquid asset and
illiquid asset. W is liquid, that
stands for wealth, illiquid A stands
for alternative, so you just make sure
everything's added up. Now, the theta_L and theta_X are acquisition and
liquidation costs. If you want to get rid of one of your illiquid
asset holding, the chances you're going
to take a haircut. It's going to be subject
to your discount. That will be
captured by theta_L. That's why it's in red. Of course, if you buy
an asset or if you get into a new partnership
with another new GP, you may do due diligence
or search cost or various other
transaction costs, that's going to be theta_X. Just be clear mT. The idea is that
we're going to have following structure which
is every cap T years, think about six years for now. Every six years, the fund has automatically liquidity
events and throughout the life of the investor, you can generate
liquidity as well. That's why there's
indicator function in both dynamic processes. This is just to make sure we know the two-state of errors. I want you to think about
the following, which is, there's going to
be in addition to the standard of risk
return trade off, another important trade-off is how much liquidity
exposure you want. This ratio between W and A will be critically
important for the model, the entire model
essentially rests on that. Now, let me talk about
the preferences. This is a generalization of the version you may have seen. I sent to my discuss and Thomas only two weeks ago
with a new results, so apology in advance.
Why do I want to do that? It's not because as
the price is known, this is doable whenever you
have a power utility model, it doesn't really cost you
much to do Epstein-Zin. But the reason we're doing this particular preference is that I want to emphasize
the distinction between gamma and EIS Psi and is a very good economics that I want to emphasize towards
the end of my presentation. Just stay tuned
there. But just make sure everybody's
on the same page, we're going to have
three parameters describing the
investors preferences. One is how much
impatience, that's zeta. Of course, you also have the
standard of risk aversion, which is risk attitude, and also you have
how much you are willing as an investor to swing your consumption over time and that turns out
to be I think, very important for
institutional investors. For example, as a first cut, we tend to think
that pension funds have less flexibility
there compared with endowments or maybe even
sovereign wealth funds or our family offices
where spending is a much more flexible
to some extent, at least compared
to pension funds. Anyway, we're going to
use these variations to tease out very different investment and
spending policies. This is just a technical version of what you saw on
the last slide. In the interest of time,
let me just move on. This is the
optimization problem. Here's what's going
to happen. Now, utility function, value
function is in units of Euros. That's not all that useful
to convey to practitioners. What I want to do is
convert that into what we call certainty
equivalent wealth, which is if you had to give away all your entire
massive opportunity, just move into the world where let's say Merton
Samuelson hold. Now, how much money do you want? That's going to be capital P. Of course, depends
on liquid wealth, illiquid asset
holding and time too. The little t is
the calendar time. Then the b_1s,
phi_1s, don't worry, they're the standard
Merton constants. What do I need to focus
in the interest of time? I want you to think
about liquidity ratio, which is how much you are
in the public equity and bonds versus how much you're in illiquid, that's
going to matter. Important concept is going
to be the marginal value of liquidity, that little PW. In other words, if I give you a dollar more liquid asset, how much do you value? Accountants will say 1, that's not true in a model. In the interest of time, I'm
going to just skip this. You have interesting
consumption policy rule where the highlighted parts are
deviations from a Merton. Anyway. Here are the
parameter values. These are not randomly
picked parameters. We have details in the paper to talk about how we
calibrate them. But anyway, I'm happy to talk more about this
if you're interested. Because I want to connect
this to what people do, so let's think about what
we mean by net worth, which is mechanically adding up your liquid and the liquid
wealth the holding. Of course, that's not
a sufficient stake variable because W's and
A's are very different. But nonetheless, we're going to plot everything
against this ratio, which is called allocation to alternative divided
by total net worth, little z, I'm going
to plot that. In interest of time, let me focus on things that I think are
most interesting. These are rebalancing boundary. Because you have acquisition
liquidation costs, so the solution features
some sort of range. The really big range where
allocations can be optimal. It's really path dependent. But in the interest of time, when you set up your
portfolio at time 0, what you want to do, you want to essential trade-off liquidity diversification as well as risk
return trade-off. That's what the picture
says. Horizontal axis is the allocation to illiquids
add our total portfolio. The vertical axis
is how well you do. That's of course, a
well-behaved function. Now, let me just spend the
rest of time to talk about what do you expect
to get, the results. Now, the highlighted,
the black row is what we call the baseline. You can see here with somewhat reasonable
parameter values, what you get is it's
not that hard actually. If you think about 2-3 percent
allocation to illiquids alpha to generate
something between 34-60 percent allocation
to alternatives, which is more or
less what people do. Of course, it comes at
the cost of crowding out fixed income and public equity. That's alpha effects. Now, I'll not speak at that.
I explained volatility. I said this is huge. It
turns out this is very, very sensitive, a parameter. In other words, if
unspanned volatility is low, alternatives look great. But if unspanned volatility is somewhat high, it
doesn't look that great. You look at 25 versus five. The difference is humongous. Risk aversion has a
very, very large effect. That's probably what
you would expect. Baseline model is
about 30 alternatives, and if you risk
aversion doubles, it goes down to 17 percent. EIS, I want to spend a minute on this because I find
this quite intriguing. The standard Merton model, say Duffy Epstein showed
in the IFS paper, if you do that with a modern environment
with Epstein-Zin, then you get nothing from EIS on the portfolio choice because there is a
separation result. Here you see it's not true. But one of the most
striking result is that the high the EIS, the much more flexible
your spending is. If you look at the upper
range value like 2, your spending is 1.4 percent. But if you look at
your low EIS case, like Bob Hall's
number for example, he's going to be spending
is going to be six percent. Very significant variation. Now, because when you
think about pension funds, more like 0.1 perhaps, think about the family office going to the other
extreme more like 2 or 1. You do see that family office is a lot more aggressive
to illiquids because why? Because their spending
is very flexible. They can do a lot
more on illiquids. That's what you see in
asset allocation range. You can see the
alternatives goes from 34-50 percent from the black
line to the blue line. The bunch of extensions we actually have and some are
in the paper, some are not. But let's leave this all out because I want to
finish on time. Now, let me just
wrap everything up. It's not meant to be
everything all in model. It's meant to be a
parsimonious enough model, by try to capture
first all the issues involving endowments. We built a modern
portfolio theory, we take illiquid alternative
assets seriously, we model illiquidity
in four ways, and then we provide
one former model that's essentially in my
view captures, at least in terms of heavy exposure
aspect to alternatives. Basically, what we're finding is that preference heterogeneity
matters hugely. Alpha has Epsilon [inaudible], that's more or less I think would be consistent
with your prior. What would matter? Alpha, volatility unspanned, Epsilon. What are the other
preference parameters? They got to be something
like risk aversion, which is hardly surprising. But more interestingly,
as I said earlier, which is the EIS result, which is you invest
long-term investors who can really swing their
consumption back-and-forth. They are really more naturally suited for
exposures to illiquids, holding everything
else constant. It's not a
one-size-fits-all, remember the Community College
example versus the others. Let me stop here. 