Matthew Jackson: As
Jim just mentioned, Duran and I will do a tag team. I'll do the first lecture,
Duran will do the second, I'll do the third, and
he'll do the fourth so we'll have breaks in-between. Just in terms of background. The slides from the
two parts I'll do are available here on my website and Duran and I'll
tell you about this, I guess, some paper
copies of Duran slides and also PDF of his. The assumption here will be that people are not necessarily familiar
with network analysis. Some of you I know from seeing faces are, but some
people aren't. We'll start from ground zero
in terms of building up. The first lecture
here is going to be just a a crash course, basic background of analysis
of social networks. Some measures that might be useful how we think about
representing networks and so forth, and then we'll get progressively in a little bit deeper as we go into
the other lectures. It's an enormous area that covers lots of literatures
now so we'll be a little bit pressed for time
in terms of digging deep. But do stop me if there's something that
you need clarified, I'm happy to clarify
things as we go along. One just basic starting
point, why study networks? Basically because a lot of our economic interactions are
within social structures. The way that we form opinions, how we learn about things. People influence our behaviors, access to job information. There's a long list here, transmission of viruses, favor exchange,
choices of behavior. The list is very extensive and understanding how
network structure impacts these behaviors can be first-order in a lot of
applications, and so understanding the connection
is fairly critical. You can also be purely
interested in social structures. When you talk to sociologists
are not necessarily always interested in what
the implications are, but sometimes just prima facie, interested in what
networks look like. But we'll move a little bit beyond that in these lectures. There's lots of literatures
that work on or around these topics, and
you'll be seeing snippets from different
ones as we go along. Sociology is obviously the one that's been added for
more than a century, economics, a couple of decades, computer science,
a decade or so, statistical physics
actually is probably one of the most active areas in
this research these days. Random graph theory,
there'll be a bunch of different tools will pull
from, and we'll look at a little bit of what
the state of the art is from an economist's
perspective. We'll also be talking
about areas of open research as we go along. Four parts. I'll be doing
the first and the third. Duran, the second
and the fourth. In the first one is
just going to be very basics, some measures. How do we operationalize networks in ways
that are useful? Then Duran is going to
talk a little bit about peer effects and
identification issues. Then I'll come back to talking about
diffusion, and more on identification issues and
some estimation problems and challenges in
working with networks. Then Duran will
wrap things up by talking more generally
about how we can understand
transmission of shocks and other things through economies
using networks as a tool. I'm going to start with is just a few examples pulled from different research areas of different kinds of
data and a view of a few applications, and
just preview some of the questions just so people are aware of the
things we're talking about. Here, I'll start with
my favorite example, which comes from work by Padgett and Ansell, and goes back to work that had been
done by Kent earlier, which is looking at this
is a network of marriages in Florence in the 15th century. You can see here's a pointer. I'm sure this is turned on. Yes, but the pointer
doesn't seem to work. Let me go. At the center
here are the Medici. Part of this is trying to understand how the Medici
rose from being in a not so prominent or
moderately important family to being one of the
more important families during this time period. We'll come back to this
story a little bit later, but the marriage is
playing an important role. Another example here is one which comes from
the Add Health dataset. This is a set of students
in a high school in the US, color-coded by gender,
male and female, male blue, female are
pink in this picture. A link between two
indicates that they had a romantic relationship inside an 18-month window during which these data were collected. You begin to see
things that actually are quite typical of networks. There's one large component where a lot of the students are interconnected, and then a bunch of smaller connected components. These numbers down here, they're actually 63 die ads where there were just
two people interacting. But then, there's a
lot of individuals who are interconnected through
a larger component. We'll talk a little
bit about that and some of the
implications of this for things like diffusion
as we go along. This is a picture of military alliances
in the year 2000, this is from a paper I'm working on with
student at Stanford. It turns out that these
networks actually correlate very strongly
with trade alliances, and understanding
the interaction between the military
alliances and the trade alliances gives us a picture into the
incidence of war. It gives us insights that
we wouldn't have otherwise. You can begin to see
that there's a lot of military alliances which
are geographically based, which actually
correlates heavily with trade networks, and you can
look at the evolution of these networks over time and try to understand what the
implications of these things are for both trade and for military
interventions and war. This is one from a
paper by Soromaki and some co-authors, which looks at inter-bank
loans overnight. Here we have basically the four largest banks.
You can see here. JPMorganChase, Bank of America, CitiGroup, and Wells Fargo. There's something which is typical of some networks
but not others. Here this is what's known
as a core periphery network where you see about 25 banks which are completely connected. They all interact
with each other. and then a bunch
of smaller banks which intend to interact with just one or
two of the others. In that case, you end up with a very particular pattern for contagions and other things as we'll see in
the last lecture. Networks are going to
have different shapes. They come in all
different applications and these are just
previewing some of the types of things
we'll be looking at. But the main challenge
with dealing with network data is
that the number of networks that you
might observe on any given set of nodes
is exponentially large. Just to drive that point home, here if you just had 20 nodes, if you start thinking
about counting the number of networks
which are possible, well, you just go through
the combinations here. Person 1 could have
19th possible friends, Person 2, 18, not counting
Person 1 and so forth. You end up with two to the 190th possible
networks just on 20 nodes. If you go to Wikipedia, this
is Wikipedia's number here. The number of atoms
in the universe is somewhere between 2 to the 158th and 2 to the 246th
by people's estimates. You've got more networks
just on 20 nodes, then you have atoms
in the universe. You're looking at
something which is a fairly large
number of networks. That means it's
impossible just for us to describe particular
networks, and categorize them just directly by single-case network number 75. It's not going to
be very meaningful. We're going to have to
simplify things somehow. In particular, in terms
of simplification, what we're going
to do is have to work with statistics or aggregate descriptions
of networks in ways that are still useful, but capture important
descriptive details of the networks and
allow us to tie them back to economic behaviors, and things that
have implications for economic behaviors. The question is sort of,
what are the objects? How do we describe
these objects in ways that are simple enough to work with and don't involve so
many different calculations, but at the same time are useful in terms of
driving implications? What we're going to do is in
the first lecture is we'll go through four different
types of characterizations. The first is going to be
global patterns of networks. We will talk about things
on a global level. Things like path
links and networks. How far does it take to get from an average node to another
node in a network? Degree distributions. How connected are
different nodes? Is it a very irregular network? Does everybody have exactly the same number of connections? [inaudible] Does it look more like a core
periphery network? These are going to be things that describe the network as a whole and look at
these global patterns. Then we'll drill into
segregation patterns. These are things that
we can look at where the network has no labels on it. It's just a picture
of a network. We don't know what the
characteristics of it is, and we just know
that there's some patterns that are emerging. We can also begin
to start labeling nodes by their types. Once we start doing that, then there's a separate
set of patterns that will emerge. In particular, what
we'll call homofily, which has the tendency of similar nodes to be
associated with each other. There's strong segregation
patterns in networks, and these are going to be
another global characteristic that are going to be
important to take care of. We'll have these larger macro
descriptions of networks, and then we'll be looking
at a more micro level. We can begin to look
at local patterns. If I'm connected to two friends, are they friends
with each other? That's what's known
as clustering, that has important implications in things like risk-sharing, favor exchange, information
passing in a network. We'll talk about local patterns. How do things look on
a very local level? We'll also talk, at the end of this
first lecture, about positions in networks. Another thing which turns
out to be important is being able to characterize who
is important in a network, who's influential, who's
powerful, who's central. There's a whole series
of different ways of measuring things
like centrality, influence, power, these terms that you have some
idea of what they mean. We can operationalize those by looking at a network and say, this is the most
important node in a very specific sense. We'll be able to
rank nodes based on some measures of importance. These will be things that look more at a particular
characteristics, either of the local neighborhood
or a particular nodes, and these other ones will be broad overarching
pictures of the network. Let's start with the first ones. We'll talk a little
bit about path lengths in degree distribution. What do we know a little
bit about these things? Before doing that, let me
just give you a little bit of notation to fix ideas. Generally, we're going
to be talking about some finite set of
nodes, vertices, players, agents,
whatever you might call them depending on the
particular application. One through n. The relationships on the network is often going to be represented by what we
call the adjacency matrix, which is just a matrix of, in this case say zeros and ones. Either people are friends with each other or they're not. They're allies, or
they're not allies. They're trade partners, or
they're not trade partners. They had a romantic
relationship where they didn't. These are just 0,
1 relationships, and we'll keep track of this just via matrix known
as the adjacency matrix. Sometimes we're going
to be interested in a particular weighted
versions of this, we can also allow
the intensities of these relationships. They might be directed, I might cite somebody that
doesn't cite me back. Depending on a
particular application, these might have different
weights or directions. The canonical version is just
going to be zeros and ones in situations where things
tend to be reciprocal. If I'm friends with you and
you're friends with me. In a network then, often when we talk about paths, we'll represent these
things graphically, we can talk about
a path from 1-7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 this is a particular
path in this network. We can also talk
about shortest paths. 1, 3, 7 would be the
geodesic in this, a shortest path in the network. Often we'll be interested in shortest paths for things like
information transmission. How long does it take for a
piece of information that's injected at one
part of the network to reach everyone else? Does information
transmit quickly or slowly in a network? We might be interested in, what's the average path length? In path length here, will often work with shortest paths, not necessarily longest paths. The diameter of a network
is the largest geodesic. You look at the longest distance between any two nodes where distance is measured
by shortest paths. That would be known
as the diameter. Lots of situations, a network might have
some isolated nodes or some disconnected
small components. In that case, what's often used when people talk about the
diameter of a network, they'll be talking about
the largest component. For instance, even if
you look at Facebook, where you have 700
million nodes, you have situations where
there's some people who just have web pages and
absolutely no friends. You don't want to say
that the distances are infinite just because you have
a few disconnected nodes, you measure things
on the rest of the large component
of the network. Diameter can be
prone to outliers. Often we'll talk about
average path length instead. You can look at the average
distance between nodes as opposed to the maximum
distance between nodes. These things again
are going to be important because they help us understand how quickly
information is going to diffuse through a network or how fast a
contagion might occur, and how long it might take for things to move from
one place to another. One feature that has been
known for quite a while now, I guess Milgram is probably the first really
nice illustration of this is that social networks, when you look at acquaintances and different relationships
between people, tend to have short
average path lengths. In particular, let
me describe what Milgram did if people don't know is Milgram was famous for various experiments, but one of his famous
experiments was a letter experiment
where he gave letters to people in one part of the
US, and asked them to send those letters to targets in the other part of the US. You were given a name, say John Smith is an economist
in Massachusetts, see if you can get
this letter to them. It starts out in
Nebraska or Kansas. The person then sends it
to one of their friends. The letter then has a list and the second person then
puts their name on the list, and then forwards it to a
third person that they might think is somehow able
to get this letter on. Maybe if I'm in Kansas, I don't know John Smith, I don't know any
economist, maybe I send it to a friend I know
who lives in Boston. Then that friend happens to know somebody in a university, so sends it to that
person, and so forth. Through that method
then eventually makes its way hopefully
to the target. Out of this experiment, basically what he found was that the 25 percent of
the letters made it, which is actually a high number given participation rates. Now you multiply those
participation rates so you get a fall off. The median was 5. The median number of hops was 5. The distance was fairly short compared to what
you might expect. Also, notice that this isn't necessarily the shortest
path in the network. This is a path in the
network but it could be that since people don't know exactly what the
shortest path is, they don't see the network they sent it in a very
circuitous route. Now, there are some
serious problems with taking this
number as a median. Why? There's a
selection bias here. More distant chains are less likely to make it
than shorter chains. You're biased in ways
that are going to favor lower numbers
of being successful. There is some endogeneity to the ones that made
it, and there are subsequent follow-up
experiments that have taken care
of that trying to estimate exactly what
the unbiased estimate of these hops are. You can also just look at
these things directly. These are looking at
co-authorship studies. In economics, there's a study by Sanjeev Rael and Michael
Venderly, and Raghu Gonzales. Economics, the mean is
about 9.5 and the max is 29 if you just put all economists who
published in a decade, published in an
ISI-indexed journal. Put a tie between them if
they co-authored a paper, and then just look
at that network. That gives you some idea of how information might flow
through the profession. It turns out to be
fairly typical. If you look at
mathematics, physics, you get similar
order of numbers. Facebook, everybody
always asks about this. Average is actually 4.7. Amazingly on Facebook, 99.9 percent of the
nodes are connected in the largest component out of about 720 million
pages as of 2011. It's a fairly small world in terms of the average path link. Getting from one end of
the network to the other, you have less than five hops in terms of getting that
information across. One thing to understand
then is just as a basic level is why do you see such small average path lengths
in such a large network. Facebook isn't constructed, they have short average path length. It's constructed for people to just communicate
with their friends. You put 720 million people together, and you get
a fairly small network in terms of overall diameter
and average distance. Understanding this is
fairly straightforward. It has to do with the exponential reach that
we have in moving outwards. What you can do is begin, let's do a simple calculation
where what we'll do is just look at a tree which
is known as a Cayley tree, which is a very
regular tree where at each point in time, everybody has exactly
the same number of friends, and their friends
always move outwards. We don't have any
loops coming back. The first first person we
look at has d friends. Then each one of those people they have the
friend with the first, they reach another d
minus 1 and so forth. We can just ask if this was
the structure of the world, what would the average path length look
like in that world? Just how far do
we have to go out before we cover the whole world from this person's perspective? You just keep adding these up as you go outwards. What
do you end up with? The next level is going
to give you d. We've got another d minus 1 connections for each of these
people and so forth. As you go outwards, you end up with a sum of how many nodes you've reached at each level moving
out from this person. Looking at this person's
network reaching outwards, if you go out l steps, then you've got this sum is how many nodes
you've reached. For a reasonably large d, a good approximation for
this is roughly d minus 1^l. This sum looks like this. If you just do the
sum, partial sum, and then take an
approximation of it, it looks like d minus 1^l. To reach everybody
else in the society, if I want to reach n minus
1 other individuals, I just need d minus 1^l
to be equal to n minus 1. I go through, and what
do I end up with? L is on the order of log n
minus 1 over log d minus 1, roughly log n over
log d. You get something which says
expanding outwards. For this very nice tree, it looks like the length we need is actually
going to scale with the log of the number
of nodes compared to the log of the reach in
terms of number of friends. That gives us an idea that
that's something which is going to be logarithmic
in the number of nodes. That gives us an idea of
why it could be very small. Now obviously this is
a tree, and why on earth would something like
Facebook look like a tree? It's not at all obvious. If you take Facebook, it's not going to have a
tree-like structure. It's going to have a much
different structure. Well, what you can show is that there's a whole series of theorems that for many classes
of large random graphs, average distance and
maximum distance are proportional to log n over the log of the expected degree. It turns out the
first version of this that appears in a famous paper by Ergos and
Renyi in the late '50s, and early '60s, they
had several papers. Part of the reason that
this happens is that even if you just put
down links at random, you end up having a lot
of a tree-like structure underlying the overall network. You have enough of a
tree-like structure and things expand rapidly enough that you still get
the same expansion property, even if it's not constructed
explicitly as a tree. The proof of this thing is now relatively
well understood. There's a paper by Chung
and Lu that extends it to a whole series of
different degree distributions. I have a paper that extends it to economically
relevant models that have
characteristics in them. You can show that for a
wide class of models, you get the same structure. It looks like log n over
log expected degree. Let's just take a
look, and see whether this looks reasonable in terms of empirical validity. This is taken from that
same Add Health dataset that we looked at the
romance relationships for. These are 84 different
high schools. This is actually taken from some work I did with Ben Golub. Here what we have is average
shortest path length of the actual data, and then log n over log
of the expected degree. Here you have a series of
different high schools that varied in terms
of their structure. Some were 50-person high
school, some were 3,000. You end up with very
different sizes of the high schools
difference up. Basically, the log n over
log d seems to fit the data, at least here fairly well. In a lot of applications, it seems to fit fairly well. Just in terms of doing
back-of-the-envelope calculation, people have heard
of six degrees of separation world about
seven billion people. Suppose that each person has 50 reasonably close
friends that they talk to, log n over log d is roughly six. It's not hard to
see why something on a scale of Facebook
might end up with a fairly short
average path length when you do these
kinds of calculations. The first part here is
we've got these networks. We have ways of measuring. One thing we were interested in measuring is average
path length. Conclusion. A lot of
these are going to have some underlying tree-like
structure enough so that you can actually have fairly short average
path lengths in very large societies. That's one part of the picture, one thing that we might
want to measure and keep track of when we're looking
across different networks. A second thing is then going to be neighborhood and degree, because it's not going
to be that everybody has exactly 50 friends, some people are very social, and some people might
be very asocial. Capturing that is going to be done by keeping track of
who are the friends of person i in the network g.
Who are the j's such that i and j are connected in a network g. I'll
use this notation i, j, and g just to indicate
that gij is greater than zero that they're
connected in that network. Then a person's degree is just the number of connections
they have so degree is just a term for connectedness and an important aspect of a network is going to be how degree is distributed
in a network. As we saw before by that picture of a core periphery network in the inter-bank loan network, we end up with very
different possible degrees. We can have networks that have roughly the
same average degree, having very different
configurations in terms of who's
connected to whom and how many people have very high degree and how many people have
very low degree. This is an area which is an important distinction in
terms of networks and one of the reasons that this is
an important distinction is when we get to things like contagion or transmission
diffusion models, it's going to make a big
difference whether we're in a network like this where here if we hit this person with information it
instantly spreads to everybody else here it
might be much harder to get information to move from one part of the
network to another. Having hubs and spokes networks look very different
from having ones where everybody has more or less the same degree that can
affect diffusion processes, contagion processes, information
and learning processes. One thing we can
ask is, what does distribution of degrees
look like in a network? We can just keep track
of different ones. If you look at two of the networks we've
talked about already. Here I put the
romance network has one degree distribution
so this is the degree on the x-axis, and the frequency on the y-axis. You get one distribution for
say, the romance network. You get a different
distribution for the co-authorship network,
and often you can look at different networks
and you can order these things by means of stochastic dominance
relationships. One might be more
dense in the sense of a first-order stochastic
dominance or it might be more dispersed in the sense of second-order
stochastic dominance. Doing these comparisons across degree distributions
is actually something that then allows you
to bring these to bear on information
learning processes, other things that we
want to figure out how it's working. If you look at fitting some
of these things to data, this is a network so here what I did is put up
some degree distributions of different networks,
and just show you that they exhibit different
patterns so empirically, you actually see some
dramatic differences in the patterns and let me just explain what these
pictures look like. Often when people plot degree distributions
in network science, the way that you standardly do this is on a log-log plot. You plot the log
of the frequency against the log of the degree. Here we've got
logged frequencies and the log of the degrees. Here actually is the log of
the complement of the CCDF which actually behaves often
similarly to the frequency. Ones that are fairly curved are ones that look very
much like a random network. If you look at the
high-school romance network, if you put down a, basically
a Poisson distribution, which has the distribution
you would get if you randomly put down links of given degree, you'll end up with a frequency
distribution that matches the high-school romance
network very closely. If you look at something that looks like the World Wide Web, then these things are often said to have scale-free
distributions, power-law distributions, partly because this
begins to look almost linear in terms of
its degree distribution. What's happening here is you end up with many more nodes who have very high degree and very many more nodes
that have very low degree, then you get in some of the
more curved distributions, you've got fatter tails, and
fewer nodes in the middle. This is looking at just a
piece of the World Wide Web. This is from Albert and
Barabasi's work on this. You basically get a fit
which is pretty good in terms of just looking
at this as a power law. It looks like it has
a Pareto distribution as opposed to something which is much more at random like
a Poisson distribution. The important takeaway here
is that the distributions of these things have particular
statistical patterns. There's a diversity in
these patterns, and that diversity is
quantifiable, and generally there seems to
be a fairly simple set of different families
of distributions that capture a lot of these. There's ways of capturing
the distributions in fairly simple and
meaningful ways. What we've gone through is
just basic global patterns. I want to talk now a little bit about the segregation patterns, putting in node types, and talking about homophily. This is something
which is obviously, you can actually find this
in writings of Aristotle, Plato, and so forth. Here's a quote from
a film in Holland, birds of a feather
flock together. The idea that people associate with people who are
similar to themselves is something that's well known, and it's been around
for a long time. I want to point out from an
economist's perspective, why on earth do we
care about homophily? We care about it a lot because it affects the
heterogeneity of behavior, beliefs, culture it
affects a lot of things. It's going to be one
of the main themes that we're going to come
back to in terms of the identification when we get into the econometrics
of some of this. What's the issue here? The issue is that people
tend to associate with people who have very similar characteristics to themselves. That means that then when we are looking at peer influences, those peers tend to be correlated in terms of
their characteristics, both observed and
unobserved characteristics. The fact that they might be correlated and unobserved
characteristics means that naturally
their behaviors are going to be correlated and
that's going to make it very difficult for us to disentangle effects
that transmit through the network and effects that were there just because of the people's
characteristics which tended to correlate
with the network. Actually endogenously
figuring out what's really going
on in terms of the network is going to be
tricky, and that's going to be one of the main challenges in working with network data. That's going to
be the main theme you'll see in Lectures 2 and 3 of dealing
with some of this. It occurs across pretty
much any dimension of characteristic you can name. People have investigated
homophily on and found fairly strong evidence for it so it's not surprising that
you find it in age, race, gender, religion,
profession, and so forth. I can give you some pictures. This is one from a paper I wrote with Sergio
Currarini and Paulo Pin. These are students
in a high school. They are color-coded by self-reported race in this case so this is a health dataset. Again, the blue
nodes are blacks, red nodes there's a few
Hispanics in this school, whites are yellow here, and then there's a few other depending on whether
people click multiple characteristics
or didn't report so there's some
data missing here. But basically, it wasn't as if I pushed all the yellow nodes to one part and pushed all
the blue nodes to another. This was drawn with what's
known as a spring algorithm. The algorithm for
drawing this network, what it does is it tries to
pull together nodes that are connected and push apart
nodes that are not connected. It just iterates on that and then after some
number of iterations, you end up with a figure.
You can program it. There's a whole series
of algorithms from network science
literature that do this, but this is using one of
the spring algorithms. We collected all
these nodes together, even though they
weren't drawn that way. It pulls out the ones that
tend to be connected and you can begin to see community
patterns in these things. Not surprisingly, if you know something about
American high-schools, the students are
segregating fairly strongly according to race here. If you look at the data, basically there's 52 percent
of the students are white. Here you see 86 percent of the friendships of whites
or with other whites, black 38 percent of the school, 85 percent of their friendships
are with other blacks. Interestingly, Hispanics
are 5 percent. If you become a
very small group, you tend to integrate well. They're very well-integrated. Actually, only two percent
of their friendships are with other Hispanics and they tend to integrate
more than other groups. But you see these
patterns where you see these segregations across groups, and that's going to mean it's going to have
several implications. One is that if we begin
to think about say, adoption of certain
opinions or technologies, it's quite possible
that we'll see different equilibria if you might on one part of the network than on the
other part of the network. The segregation
patterns can allow very different cultural
norms to exist in different parts of the network, and can
allow things so that information might not spread
from one part to another. This is going to have
profound consequences. Notice that this can
be very independent of the other dimensions like the average distance, or
the degree distribution. If we hadn't colored these nodes and pulled them apart
in this manner, you might not see the particular segregation patterns
that are there. Adding these
characteristics gives us another picture of what
the network looks like. One thing that happens here, what I did is actually take the same network. But now what I did
was color-code this by what's known as
strong friendships. Strong friendships here are
ones where people actually could report
different activities that they did with each
other in a given week. Code a network of friendship
as being strong if people were reported doing at least three different activities in a given week with
another person. Studying together, going
to lunch together, some athletic activity
and so forth. They had a whole list of
things they could click. Now you see actually the
network splits almost entirely. There's I think three
friendships between blacks and whites once your code things by the stronger relationships. Depending on how you code things you could end up with different
segregation patterns. Here it's a much more
pronounced segregation pattern than it was before. This is from a paper I just wrote and it's
actually from data from a project I'll talk about
a little later with Abhijit Banerjee emerged under the current has to do flow. This is a village
in India and this is a kerosene and rice
borrowing network. In this case the nodes
are color-coded by caste. The blue nodes are
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. The castes that are recognized by the Indian government
for affirmative action, the red nodes are the general and otherwise
backward castes, so the more forward castes. Basically again you see
segregation pattern. This is also drawn by
a spring algorithm. Now if you look at the number, the probability of a link
existing between people in the same caste
designation in this case is about 9 percent and it's about 6/10 of a
percent going across. You see more than 10 times
probability of link between. Again, that's going to have
consequences for a lot of transmission of
information and so forth. This is an interesting
one that comes out of a paper by Luciani in 2013. I don't know if you
ever saw this. This was in the New York Times. This is US Senate co-votes. What I'm going to do is
just take you through three decades, three
different snapshots. Here what have we got? We've got senators, and they're color-coded by
political party blue and red. There's a link
between two senators. If they voted the same
way on at least 100 bills in the given session of that
particular year in 1990. Here the network, this
is again pulled apart by a spring algorithm so
it collects the blue, and the red tend to be on different sides but it's
fairly well meshed together. This is 1990. This is 2000. It starts to pull apart.
There's fewer connections. 2010. When people are talking
about polarization you can visualize it pretty clearly when you start using these algorithms and actually
looking at the networks. The co-voting together in the Congress now is
pretty much nonexistent. The votes are almost always,
who's that in the middle? I can't quite read,
it's from Maine. Who's the Senator from Maine? Nelson. Ron Burt has an important paper on one of the most important
sociological papers on network structures. He talks about structural holes. People that can be important in an organization are ones who are bridging
different groups. That looks like a
structural hole as clearly as you can
see them often in data. But these pictures
allow us to see and track whether or
not we're seeing different patterns and roughly whether they're
changing over time. One thing to emphasize
from this as well is often just from data
considerations. We tend to work with data in isolation where we look
at a particular snapshot and we treat this as the network as if all
these people were communicating and it was static. But these things
change over time. They're very fluid. People might communicate with some people intensely
for some period, not for a long time
then intensely again. The dynamics of networks
is something which is a nascent area of methodological study, and an important one for keeping in mind and pushing forward with. We've talked through these two. I'm going to leave local
patterns to talking. I'll come back to that
in the third lecture. But let me talk a little
bit about positions in networks. This will set up
also a little bit of what we'll talk about
in the next thing. But trying to keep track of how important
individuals are, how central they are,
other kinds of things. Looking at the micro level
now when you're looking at a particular node and trying to identify something about
its characteristics. Economists, we care about networks because
of externalities. Without externalities
networks would not be that interesting. Part of the reason
they're really important is because somebody's behavior affects other people's
behaviors, and they don't necessarily
take that into account. But understanding how important somebody is and how
influential they are is something that can be essential in a lot
of different studies. There's going to be a
lot of heterogeneity and nodes influences not just due to characteristics, but also due to
network position. It could be that a
village has an elder or somebody who is
wiser and so forth. They might have a lot of
influence just because of their position and their wisdom. But it could also be
that somebody who is a shopkeeper tends
to talk to a lot of people and they can be very
influential just because of their network position, and not because of their
knowledge or background. Capturing things like centrality
and influence measures and networks is going
to be something that's important in a lot
of applications. How do we capture this? Well, it's going to depend on the nature of the application
and the interaction. What's happened is there
has been a mushrooming of different measures
of importance in networks. There's all sorts. We could spend more than four
hours just going through different network
influence measures. Today what I'll do is
I'll just pull out a few of the most prominent ones and ones that are
well-known and well used. The most basic one is just what's known
as degree centrality. This is just capturing
how connected a node is. It's a basic measure. You can normalize
it if you want. Keep track of what percentage of the people I'm connected
to and so forth. Well, that's some measure of
my reach or my influence. If I know half the
people in the room then that's measure as opposed to knowing 1 percent of
the people in the room. That's a very crude measure. When that goes back to symbol in around 1906 and we start talking about importance
of different individuals, degree centrality
is a central role. We go back to Padgetts Data. For instance, looking
at the Medici in this, so the Strozzi's, the Guadagni's were
other families in this time period that we were a number of other families who had better wealth and better political
connections and yet the Medici seem to rise
at this point in time. If you read a little bit into what Cosimo de
Medici was writing, he was engineering marriages of his family with other families, with the idea of becoming
important in a network. In particular, just in
terms of degree centrality, we see that they have
six connections, the Strozzi's have four
and Guadagni's have four. They look a little more
important on this dimension. That doesn't really capture
a lot of what's going on, what we'll have other measures
that might do better, but it begins to capture
something about the network. What's the problem with
degree centrality? Is that it's not capturing several other things that
we might want to capture. One is that people can
be more influential, not just because they
have more friends, but because they have
better situated friends. Another is that
somehow you want to capture where you
sit in a network. There's some idea that
this node is more central in terms of
where it is placed, and also in terms of
who it's connected to. Degree centrality
labels these two nodes as being equivalently connected. There's going to be a large
equivalence classes of nodes which really are very
different animals in terms of what their
connections are in a network and how potentially
influential they are. We want to measure
that it picks that up. The centrality measure which begins to do that is by thinking of seeing the
centrality should be proportional to the sum of
your neighbor centralities. Let's just define the
centrality of a node i to be proportional to the sum of the friends of
i's centralities. We just want a measure which says it's not only the
number of friends, but let's wait things
by their centrality. Now we'll define
things that way. Very simple variation on this. What do we end up with? We end up with C_i proportional
to the sum of C_j's. If we write that in terms
of the adjacency matrix, we have some scalar a times the C_i is going to be equal to the sum of the g_ij times C_j. That's just in terms of
our adjacency matrix. Well, this is just an
eigenvector calculation. This is just saying
that the vector of centralities is proportional to the adjacency matrix times
the vector of centralities. We've got a system of equations, and a system of unknowns, which looks exactly like a
eigenvector calculation. This is what's known as
eigenvector centrality. Eigenvector centrality, there's many different eigenvectors for an n-by-n matrix that
can be up to n of them. In this case, the tendency is to take the one which has
all non-negative entries, which for a non-negative matrix by the Perron-Frobenius Theorem, there'll be a unique eigenvector which has all
non-negative entries. There's a lot of nice
matrix algebra that'll tell us things about what
this vector looks like. We have an eigenvector
calculation. We can go ahead, and use that as a measure of centrality as well. That's known as
eigenvector centrality. Basically Google
PageRank, it should be a capital P was
named after this. Google PageRank keeps track in the early days was the way that pages if you clicked in a search, and there were a whole series of
things that might match, they had to rank which one is appeared first,
second, and third. The original algorithm
was actually based on an eigenvector
calculation. It's becoming much more
sophisticated since then, but that was the origins of it, was using a basically an
eigenvector calculation on the matrix if
they kept track of. You can do random models
which if you look at a random Markov
chain on a network, the percentage of time you will spend a different nodes is going to be proportional
to the eigenvectors. This captures a whole
series of things which are interrelated and have
some nice mathematical foundations. If we go back to
that same network, we see your now this
node comes out at 0.31, this one comes out at 0.11. This one is much
more central than the other one once we do
this kind of calculation. In fact the most central node, and this one has
seven connections. This one only had six, but it ends up being much more central in terms of
eigenvector centrality. You can go through
and use this as a different measure of
centrality and it'll give you different information
about positions in the network then
degree centrality. You can go back,
the Medici are also the most eigenvector
central family here. Strozzi I guess a close
second than Guadagni. Ridolf would do pretty well. Here are the Ridolf
do pretty well even though they only
have three connections. They're pretty well
situated in this network. Another prominent measure
is betweenness centrality. What is betweenness
centrality measure? This keeps track
of the number of shortest paths that a
given node lies on. One thing you could do is say, am I essential for connecting other
people in the network? One way you could
do that and say, look at all pairs of people. If the shortest path between
them goes through me, or one of the shortest
path goes through me, then I'm somehow important
in connecting them. Betweenness centrality than just does a calculation
which says, "Okay, look at how many
different connections there are shortest
paths between i and j." Then keep track what's the number of geodesics between
i and j that k lies on. Then do a calculation which
I get if I'm on half of the shortest paths
between person 1 and 2, then give me a half for that, and then sum over all
the possible pairs of other individuals
and then normalize by how many pairs you
can be considering, and that gives you
betweenness centrality. If you go back to this, the Medici are on 52 percent of the shortest paths
between other families. If you read into
Cosmos writings, actually that was one of the things he was
trying to engineer. They wanted to be
important brokers in the courts weren't so
great in enforcing contracts and so
forth at that time, having being an
important broker between other people's business
dealings was very enriching. They were in 52 percent, the Strozzi 10 percent, Guadagni about 25 percent. So you'd begin to see
differences here. All of these measures
are capturing different things and they might be different applications that they're going
to be useful in. We've gone through
degree centrality, just keeping track
of connectedness. These kinds of influenced
prestige eigenvector numbers, it's not what you know, but who you know kinds
of calculations. That's going to be another
important dimension which captures things. That's the eigenvectors between this importance as
an intermediary. There's also another set of notions that we won't
talk about today, but I'll just throw out
their closeness measures. You can just ask a given node, how close is it to other nodes? I might be close to
a lot of people. Some other people
might be more distant. You can just keep
track of what's my average distance
to other people. There's closeness in
decay variations. Ease of reaching out to other
nodes. Okay, let's see. I think what I'll do
is this is probably a good place to stop
the first lecture. 