Parag Pathak: Thank you
Ell, let me move on and continue my lecture, today is mostly
going to be about some theoretical aspects
of matching market design. That's an immense topic. I'll only be able to touch
on a couple of issues here. I want to start
off by echoing one of the questions that
Ell started with, which is the very first question any design economists
needs to confront, which is, why do you
need to design a market? A very closely related
question to that is, what determines the set
of instruments that you can use for designing markets or a question that sometimes matching
market designers get, which is, why can't
you use prices here? These are pretty
fundamental questions that economic theorists
have debated for decades. I won't have time to
do justice to them. But I do think it's helpful to set the stage by telling you a bit about one of my
favorite design markets, and that is The Oklahoma
Land Rush of 1889. This was a system used in the late 1800s devised by
President Benjamin Harrison to allocate land parcels to non-native
settlers in Oklahoma. The mechanism worked as follows. Settlers were asked to queue up on high noon of April 22nd. As soon as it was high
noon, there was a race. Whoever got to a land parcel first was allowed to claim it. Now, not everyone
played by the rules, so some individuals
jumped the queue. In fact, those individuals
became known as Sooners. Some of you may have heard of the University of
Oklahoma Football Team. They're called the Sooners. As far as I know, no economist was involved in
designing this market. But when we see a
situation like this, it raises the question that many market
designers start with, could we have designed
a better system? If you look at land
parcel allocation and following this, states like Georgia
used the lottery, as far as I know, no state actually use an
auction based system. But there are many examples of markets that are designed by someone and many examples
where prices are not used. Some examples that
may be familiar to labor economists in particular include forced conscription. For a long time the United
States had a draft, despite Milton
Friedman's urgings to get rid of the draft. Finally, that was eliminated. Gary Becker famously argued that green card
should be auctioned. That yet has not happened
in the United States. Green cards are partly
allocated by lottery, and I sure would wish
that I could pay someone to serve on a jury
rather than serve myself. Why is it that we don't use prices in some
of these settings? There are many reasons. One basic trade-off
is the trade-off between the willingness to
pay and the ability to pay. Price-based allocation
has the benefit of allowing people to
express their preferences. But if a market-based price is used, then income
plays a large role. Rationing or lottery
based systems may allow true needs to be met. There could be an equity
or fairness rationale for using a lottery
rather than a price. The problems include over delivery to those who do
not really value items. This is an old idea first
formalized by Marty Weitzmann. It's been refined by a number of authors when
there's resell markets, when the set of instruments
is more complicated, but this is one common reason why we don't see priced
based allocation. Now, more generally, why have we restricted the set
of instruments? There's often
technological constraints, contracts cannot be made rich enough, there's
enforcement constraints. There are also moral or
repugnance constraints. These are fluid things. What I want do in
my talk today is acknowledge that
we like prices as much as any other economist, but start from a
position where we realize that they are not or
sometimes cannot be used. The goal today is to give you a whirlwind tour of some of the canonical ideas in
matching market design. I'm going to start off
talking about a class of environments that we call the one-sided
matching environment, simply allocating objects
and that's environment. I'm going to introduce
two big ideas. First is what we call
a serial dictatorship. The second big idea is
Gale's top trading cycles. Then we'll move on to talk about two-sided
matching environments. I'll quickly review the deferred acceptance literature that Ell described and talk about the Boston mechanism and some of the variants that
we've seen in the field. Then depending on how
much time we have, I will talk about a
couple of new issues, design issues, designing
choice functions. I'll conclude by telling you a little bit about
some developments where deferred
acceptance has been generalized to actually
include richer commodities, prices or even contracts. This is a very active
theoretical frontier. Let's get started. The first model I
want to introduce is what's called the House
Allocation Problem. Many of these models
are parables of big decisions in one's life, housing, the marriage model
of college admissions. What happens in
the housing model? There is a finite set of houses. There's a finite set of agents. In the model, we only work
with ordinal preferences. Agents have strict
preferences over houses and an allocation in this setting is
simply a matching. That is a function
that specifies each agent's assignment such that no house is assigned
to more than one agent. This is what we
get to start with. With these primitives in hand, what are some things we
could potentially do? A natural thing to do is what's called a
serial dictatorship. Given an ordering of agents
in a serial dictatorship, the first agent will be
assigned his top choice. The next agent is assigned his top choice among
the remaining houses, so on and so forth.
This is like a queue. It's a dictatorship, because
when it's your turn, you are the dictator you get to choose and it's
serial because we're processing agents according
to this ordering, and this mechanism has
some very nice properties. The first property is this is a strategy proof mechanism.
But what does that mean? That means truth-telling is a weakly dominant strategy
for all participants. Now, it's worth pointing out that it's not that easy to find strategy proof mechanisms. In fact, we have very strong
results saying in general, we don't have many dominant
strategy mechanisms. When we restrict the
environment such that agents have preferences
only over houses, not over what other people got, it is possible to find strategy proof
mechanisms in practice. Why is it strategy proof? Well, when it's your turn, the best thing you can do is say the house that you want the
most among what's available. You cannot influence when it's your turn because the
ordering is given. The other property of this mechanism is
Pareto efficiency. This is Pareto-efficient. That is, there is
no other allocation where an individual is doing strictly better and no
individual is doing worse. This is as simple as it gets. Now what's the problem
with this mechanism? Well, a problem
with this mechanism is the ordering
determines everything. If I'm the last person in line, I only get to pick
among what's leftover. More formally, we can say
this mechanism doesn't satisfy a property known as the equal treatment of equals. That is, if two individuals
have the same preferences, they should get the
same allocation. That can be seen as a
fairness consideration. In this setting, the
only way you can satisfy equal treatment of equals is by using some random
or stochastic mechanism. How would we enrich
this mechanism to make it random so
that we could have two individuals with the
same preferences getting the same outcome or we could do that by simply using a lottery, a uniform lottery to
determine the ordering. That's what's known as a
random serial dictatorship. A random serial dictatorship inherits the properties
of a serial dictatorship. It's also strategy proof and it's ex post
Pareto-efficient. So far, so good. This is
as simple as it gets. Now let's make this
a little bit more complicated by
adding endowments to the problem. Now
here's the jargon. In the house allocation problem, there are no endowments. The objects are collectively
owned by everyone. In a housing market problem, we'll consider the same
exact environment, but our starting point is individuals enter with a house. You can imagine, and
this is a great tool for some of the students
in first-year micro, this is the simplest
possible exchange economy. Every agent has an
endowment of a house. Agents have strict preferences. Once we introduced this
idea of endowments, it motivates thinking about a couple of other properties. The next property I want to introduce is individual
rationality. That is what it sounds like. An allocation is
individually rational if each agent is doing at least
as well as its endowment. Then the core property, the core property allocation is a core allocation if
there is no coalition of agents who would
prefer to contract amongst themselves compared to what they get in the allocation. In the limit, since we can
consider any size coalition, if this is a coalition
of one individual asking an allocation to
be in the core is the same thing as saying
it's individually rational. If the coalition was everyone, it's the same thing
as Pareto efficiency. The core is a central
concept in this literature. We have endowments. Now, how are we going to
clear this market? That leads to one of the
very prominent mechanisms in literature here and this is Gale's top trading
cycles algorithm. In fact, this was described in an article not written by Gale. It was in Shapley and Scarf's article in 1974.
How does this work? In Step 1, each agent points to the owner of his favorite house. Since the problem is finite, there's going to be
at least one cycle. A cycle is an agent pointing to another agent that eventually points back to the
initiating agent. Once we find a cycle, each agent in a cycle is
assigned the house of the agent he points to and
he's removed from the market. We execute that trait. If there's at least
one remaining agent, we'll go on to the next step. We've looked for a top cycle, top choices and we have the agents who are in the cycle trade amongst themselves. If you're left over
in the generic step, you point to your favorite
house that remains. Again because the
problem is finite, there will be a cycle, an agent pointing
to another agent, so on and so forth. We remove the cycle now at any step there can be
more than one cycle, but each agent can only
be part of one cycle. We execute those
trades and we iterate. This is Gale's top
trading cycles. Now, this is a
canonical mechanism because it has a number
of fantastic properties. What are those properties? First, the outcome of
top trading cycles is the unique core matching in this environment with
individuals in houses. It's also the unique competitive
equilibrium allocation. We can construct a price vector to decentralize this allocation, and so that was one of the first results
about this mechanism. Second result is we can think of the core top trading cycles
as a direct mechanism, and by that I mean it's a preference
revelation mechanism. Individuals reveal their type, and it is a
strategy-proof mechanism. Here now is a second
example where we have found a dominant
strategy mechanism. You cannot influence
what you get by submitting a false report
of what houses you want. Loosely speaking there, you can influence which cycles form, so you might as well report which houses you want correctly because the cycle in which you're involved
will be the one that gives you the best
house you can achieve. A third result now is a bit
of a specialist result, but it says that this mechanism
for this environment is the only mechanism you can use if you're interested
in Pareto efficiency, individual rationality,
and strategy-proofness. The case is sealed
you could say. We have an ideal mechanism, great incentives, great
efficiency properties. There's nothing else you can do. Now, these results
are classic results, but this mechanism has inspired some more recent literature by thinking of the
following extension. Let's imagine a hybrid scenario where not all agents
have endowments. There may be some agents
who come to the problem owning a house and
there are some agents who are newcomers, or we can think of a scenario where instead
of having endowments, individuals start
with property rights. I have a property right over Pat for a given house because
I'm older than Pat, say. Or I've scored higher
on a test than Pat, or I have a better
lottery draw than Pat. You can think of that
like an endowment, but it's probably
more appropriate to think of this like
a property right. In this environment, when we have these property
rights or these priorities, we can adapt top trading cycles by this following modification. In the original version,
I said you point to the owner of the house
that you want the most. Now instead, why don't you point to the house that
you want the most, and the house or the object, in this case, will point to the agent who's got the
highest property right? That's a very modest
modification, but it allows us to accommodate a richer set of problems. Now, the reason I'm
telling you about these old ideas is that
this mechanism was actually used in practice as far as I know for the first time to allocate children to
school in New Orleans. The Recovery School
District used a version of top trading cycles to allocate children to both traditional public
schools and charter schools. Here's how this was
described to the public. This is a clip of the algorithm
in the Times-Picayune. That's the now defunct
newspaper in New Orleans. In scenario A, we have a cycle involving
just one person. Here Student 1 is pointing
to school A, his top choice, and the school is
pointing to the student. A cycle can involve
this one kid. Cycles can involve more
than one kid of course. Here's an example, scenario B, student 1 is
pointing to school B. The student has got
the highest claim, the highest property
right there is student 2. That's why the school
points to two. Two then says my first
choice is school C, so he's pointing to school C. C gives three the
highest priority, three in term 1 school A. We've found this trade, we execute that
trade by assigning the child to the school
that they're pointing to. The mechanism in the RSD is Pareto efficient and it's
also strategy-proof. That's the class of
one-sided matching models. Two big ideas, serial
dictatorships, and Gale's top trading cycles. Now let's enrich the
environment and think about matching two sides. This is closer to what
Ell was talking about. Here, what's the jargon? We have house allocation,
that's one-sided. We have the marriage problem, that's a fable of matching
together men and women. What's key about the
marriage problem is it's a one-to-one
matching problem, so we can assign one man to more than one woman
and vice-versa. That's what we call
the marriage problem. College admissions is a scenario where it's a many-to-one
matching problem. The jargon there is it's mainly because the college
could have many seats. The key concepts Ell
has already introduced the celebrated deferred acceptance algorithm
and stability. Stability in this context is individual rationality
plus the absence of a pairwise block. Now, the literature on deferred acceptance
is by now immense. I looked at my undergraduate class lecture notes and said, what are the most
important results that someone would need to know about
deferred acceptance? I've summarized them here. The first result is what
we call side optimality. There is a worker optimal stable
matching and there was a firm optimal stable matching. Ell mention that already. Indeed, if I look at the worker
optimal stable matching, that's the best for workers, but it's also firm pessimal. That's the worst for
firms and vice versa. If I look at the firm
optimal stable matching, that's the worst stable
matching for workers. That's what some people
call the opposing interests or conflict between the two
sides of the market here. The second result that's important is the
incentive results. We have a dominant
strategy mechanism, but in this case you have to
restrict the set of agents. If we think about the deferred acceptance algorithm where workers propose to firms that version is a dominant
strategy mechanism, it's strategy-proof for workers. If we were to ask, do we
have a way to implement a stable allocation
that's strategy proof for both sides? The answer is no. There's
no way to do that. Unless we think about approximations like
Ell mentioned, large market approximations. The third result, again, there's a little
bit of jargon here, it's what people call the
rural hospitals result. What is the rural
hospitals result? That's a result that says something of the following sort, across all stable matchings the set of agents who
are matched is the same. Now, why would you ever
call these rural hospitals? Well one story about this is, there's a long-standing
concern that there's not enough doctors working in rural areas in the
United States. One might have said,
well, is that because of the fact that they're using
a stable matching algorithm? Well, thanks to the
rural hospitals theorem, we know if you have a
rural hospital that has an empty seat that no
one wanted to go there, it didn't matter which of the different stable points
you chose in practice, you would always have
that hospital or not have everyone taking
a seat at that place. That's why I think one reason
people call this a rural hospital's result.
Fourth results. This is a result that I'm
calling order independence. The way deferred
acceptance is usually described as what
Ell did, he said, all workers propose to
firms simultaneously. But in practice, we don't
need simultaneous proposals. With deferred acceptance, we can do this in
an iterative way. In fact, the sequence of proposals that are made does not matter
what the order is, we'll always get
the same outcome. Take a given worker having
proposed to his first choice, if he's rejected there,
we could go back to him and have him propose
to his second choice. We don't need to
wait to see what happens to all the
other workers. The reason we can do that is because this is a
deferred process. Nothing is finalized
until the very end. 