Karen Glenn: One of the
things we wanted to do to begin with is just give you a little insight into how we look at things as actuaries. One of the main things we do is look at the
solvency of the fund. This specifically is
about the DI trust fund, we're talking about the
disability program here. We also look at the
retirement fund as well. But this graph
specifically is about DI. What it shows you
is the reserves of the program as a percent
of the annual cost. If you focus to begin
with on the 1995 line, which is the black
lines at the bottom, this is what we were
projecting way back in 1995. You can see that the
reserves were low. They went up beginning in
1995 as tax rates increased. You may remember there was a little bit of a re-allocation in the OSI NDI tax
rates at that time. That led to reserves increasing. But then things
started coming down. Back in 1995, we projected that the reserves
would run out in 2016. Meanwhile, move forward to 2008, that's the aqua line
at the very top. The economy was booming, the reserves went way up. You can see that
we were projecting the reserves there to last
all the way until 2026. That shows you what difference the economy makes
in the DI fund. Moving forward a little further, 2017 is the blue line that
you can't really see, it's actually covered
by the red line. This is after the recession. Things started coming
way back down. Luckily, Congress in 2015 reallocated the tax
rates again for OSI NDI. You can see that things
were going way down, there was an reallocation
which brought things back up and now things are
projected to go down again. The good news here, you can see a little
bit of the blue line there is in 2017, we were projecting reserves
would run out in 2028. This year, in 2018 we're projecting that's
extended out to 2032. We'll get a little more into
the reasons for that later. Another graph here. This one really splits
out the income and the cost of the program as a percent of GDP over the years. Probably here what we want to
focus on is the blue line, which is the cost
of the program. You can see back in
the '80s and '90s, the cost was relatively low. That was when Baby Boomers were in their prime
working ages. Most of them weren't really at prime disability ages yet. The cost was low. They weren't really in
the disability program. However as they aged, you can see that in the 2000s, that blue line shoots way up. The Baby Boomers, this large
generation really shifted into the disability prone
ages and the costs went up. Really, this line is mainly
driven by the demographics, which you can see. Now, the line is starting
to go down somewhat. That's because these
folks really moving into retirement and smaller
generations are following them. Going forward, you
can see that we project things to be
relatively stable. Of course, this is
our projection. It's based on what
we know so far. No projection is guaranteed. The one thing we
can guarantee is that we will not
be exactly right. Steve Goss: Karen mentioned some of the experiences we
had where the Congress had to do a couple of reallocations
of tax rates back in '94 and in 2015 in order to keep the DI
reserve from depleting. But you can imagine,
and when we got into really just even prior to the product of the very recent experience
after the recession, that a lot of people were
worried about disability, about the research depleting, were worried about disability
coming off the rails. There was a lot of concern in many quarters in the academic
and the policy community about what's going on
with disability and a lot of people were
doing the classic, when you see a trend, you get out your ruler. That doesn't always
work so well. One of the things that had
been observed that was 1980 and 2010 is often cited. There was a tripling, a number of people receiving
disabled worker benefits, one of the social security
disability insurance program. Well, there was. Part of the
question was why is this? Is the system out of control? Is it getting easier
to get on disability? Well, we sat back and other
people have done this, other people have done
more on the sense but one thing that we
did and we share this with some congressional
testimonies was to try to break down that 187
percent increase, roughly a tripling over time
that occurred 1980-2010. It was pretty easy to break
this down in rough terms. You can do it all
different ways. We discovered that,
well, first of all, just the number of
people in our population between 20 and 64
increased by 41 percent. You would probably
expect you might have a few more people on
disability roles if your basic insured
population is going up or that's even just the
basic population in general. But there was another factor, which is actually a lot of people are familiar with this
concept of the Baby Boom. The Baby Boomers were
advancing at age and we were getting a different age distribution of the population, that explained 38 percent of it. We also have another
little thing which is not a tiny detail but
something of significance. When we increased our
normal retirement age by a year of between 2000 and 2005, that meant that people if they want to get a benefit
at 62 for retirement, they're going to get less but the same amount
for disability. Some of it is a little
more impetus to go in for disability benefits. Also people would stay on disability benefits
to a higher age. That also contributed
about four percent. Disability ensured we had a big increase over this
period, especially for women. We're going to have some more
on that succeeding slide on numbers of people in our population even not taking into account
the increase in the age, just the insured
rates went up a lot. The recession of starting out in late 2007 had a big effect on the number through
2010 obviously. Then also incidence
rates themselves grew some overtime for lots
of interesting reasons. All of these things
we felt pretty much explained what was going on. A year ago, we shouldn't
worry too much about the system really
coming off the rails. It was just a matter of
following the demographics. As Karen indicated back in 1995, we had projected reserved
depletion in 2016, which is where we were back at at the time of the
last reallocation. There was perhaps some
pretty lucky guesses there. Now, we're going
to talk to you a little bit some of the components of what
happened historically. I'll grab the first
one. Karen is going to get some after that. But this is the age distribution or redistribution
of the population. We like this graph. This takes about 25 and
older population in the US going back to 1940 and forward and it works
at it over time. If you look at the green, it's orange over there,
it's pinkish here. The bottom two segments
are the under 65, the working age population. Well, we broke down the working age population to over and under 45 because as most of you know the disabled
workers tend to be much more likely to be in the
over 45 than the under 45, much higher prevalence, and incidence rates at those levels. You can see between
1970 and 1990, wow, the share of the working
age population that was in the disability prone ages
was really getting small, not a big surprise that disability wasn't seen to
be a huge problem then. Between 1990 and 2010, amazing As the baby boomers shifted into that age band, 45-64, we had a big increase in
the number of people on disability rolls. Really not a big problem
in understanding that. But the fun part is as
we look into the future, we're going to have
rough stability. The under 65 is a shrinking
share as we all know of the population over 25 but the share that's in the disability-prone ages is going to be fairly
stable in the future. Of course, we've known these demographics
for a long time. This is something
that we suddenly discovered in 2010 or 2012, so we were able to make
projections along these lines. The one comment I'd
want to make about this is on the last panel, the second slide
that was shown had the wonderful
[inaudible] daily slide about prevalence rates
across different countries, please keep in mind when
you look at that slide, those are gross
prevalence rates. The total number of
disabled workers divided by the working-age population. Those are not age-adjusted. We have age-adjusted
charts because if you had those same charts
on age-adjusted basis, as we had more and more working age population move
to the higher ages, you'd see the disability
prevalence rates not increasing to the extent it
appeared in those trend. Karen Glenn: Two things to
take away from this slide. This is showing the percent
of the population ages 15 to NRA that are
insured for disability. These are the folks who have
worked enough and worked recently enough to be able
to get disability benefits. The males you can see in those rates have gone
down a little bit. We're projecting those
to stay level in the future but the real thing to notice here is
the increase in the female in short rates. They have gone way up from about 38% back in 1970
to closer to 70% today. What that means
is that women are working more and more steadily, so they're able to
get these benefits. No real surprise that more women are ending up
on the disability rolls. Similarly, these are
incidence rates. These are people coming on
to the disability rolls. As Steve mentioned,
these are age-adjusted. We like to do things
age-adjusted so that they're consistent, and
comparable across time. Otherwise, you get
demographic effects in there that can skew things up
one way or the other. Again, little hard to see here, but this begins in 1970. There was a gap between
the male rates, which are the blue rates, and the female rates
which are red but that gap has really
closed since about 2000. We are in the future
expecting female rates to be just slightly lower than
male rates going forward. Steve Goss: Another little
bit of historical perspective on this is that one of the challenges back then was when
the recession came, disability cost went way up as a percentage of
GDP and we thought, well, it's probably
good to look at both components of that ratio. You can see on the light
blue lines to the right, that is the increase
in the DI cost, benefit-cost as a
percentage of GDP between 2008 just before when the recession was only getting started and didn't really affect our disability cost yet and 2013 when we'd really basically felt all the worst effects
for the last great recession. You can see we had a
pretty big increase in DI cost as percentage of GDP. But where did that come from? Well, the far-left
little line here, which is for you, bright pink, is the increase in the benefit-cost as a
percentage for disability. You can see, well,
in 2010 we had a pretty big increase
in disability costs. But by 2013, we had really virtually no
increase in disability cost. However, what really
affected the cost of disability as a percentage
of GDP was the denominator. The fact that GDP
in fact slow down, we have another
side note here that actually shows the
change in number of workers and the
change in number of beneficiaries and it's much like this, but even more stark. We just wanted to point out
when there's a recession, it's not so much a matter of, we have enormously large numbers of extra people
getting benefits but our tax base goes down,
and that really affects our cost as percentage
of GDP and payroll. Now, flipping a little bit, I think the balance
of what we've going to be talking
about as well, actually now we'll be
going to be going to the future as Jeff foresaw. What you're going
to see on some of these remaining slides
are going to be what has really happened in
the more recent experience, which we are seeking to better understand and
looking for cards and letters and comments from y'all to help us move
in that direction. Applications and incidence
rates have been dropping ever since the peak in 2010 to
quite a dramatic degree. Numbers of beneficiaries, which people were so worried
about just a few years ago, have actually been
declining since 2013. Prevalence rates have
peaked and are dropping. Now, here's the question
about the future, are the declines we're
seeing here recently, are these temporary, or are we moving to a new level, a new situation with disability? A bunch of possibilities we've looked at is will the economy and jobs that suggests that with a returning
strong economy, this should be
temporary, or is it? Has there been a
change in the nature of employment in our country? Drop in hearings allowances, probably most are
familiar that are administrative law
judge hearings allowance rates have
dropped them in the mid-60s to the mid 40% in recent years for
perhaps a number of reasons. Some have suggested are
the Affordable Care Act, bringing more health insurance, more access to health care to many millions of people who didn't have
insurance before. Maybe it's kept a bunch of
people who might have been on the verge of applying for
disability healthier, longer, and therefore they're
not applying as much. There has been some work by
some people in this room about things off-field
office consolidations. Some of them suggested
by reduction in the number field offices
and consolidating them by SSA that perhaps we've contributed towards the
lesser applications we've gotten. Some people have talked about
attorney representation. In fact, in particular,
one very large law firm went out of business
a few years back. There was concern that
maybe their stoppage of their national advertising was not getting the
word out about you can apply for
disability benefits. We've been hearing from people though is that most of
the attorneys working that are still working
in that area and might be advertising at least as effectively as before
now on a regional basis. The other question is,
is there something more fundamental going on here? That's what we seek
to better understand. We're going to be searching
for it and again, as I said, working for more input from y'all about getting a
better understanding. Karen Glenn: This graph is
really about the numbers of disability applications
we've been seeing in social security. You can see that back in 2007, which was basically the peak
of the last economic cycle, applications were pretty low. They were on the
order of 1.6 million. During a recession,
applications kicked way up, increased rapidly to over
two million in 2010. What you can see from
there is that in each successive
trustee's report, we keep projecting the
number of applications to level off or get back
to where they were before. Every year we've been wrong. Applications since 2010 have dropped dramatically
as you can see. They're now below 1.5 million. Even when we think
the economy is really back to about the
level it was in 2000s, and then maybe not, that's
a little bit debatable. But really applications are
at an all-time low level. Even in 2018,
they're still down. Again, in the 2018
trustees report, we projected them to
start jumping back up, but they haven't.
They're still down. Now, this is estimate based
on data through mid-June. It's always possible
things will come back before the end of the year, but it's not looking good
or it is looking good. We want fewer disability
applications. Moving on to the incidence rate, I explained before,
this is really the number of people
going on the roles. This relates directly
to disability awards, people who were actually
awarded disability benefits. The picture is very similar
to the applications, one, things were low, moved up
very high in the recession, have plummeted since then. One thing to note is that the 2018 number actually
has jumped up a little bit. That's a bit of a
good news story. This is actually related to the Social Security
Administration working down the
disability backlog. We're starting to really work through some of
those older cases. More people are
getting on the roles. This graph is basically
the last one, but zooming in on the recent
history, and the near term. The blue line is exactly what you saw
on the previous graph. This is our projection for
the 2018 trustees report. The little red line there
shows what would have happened if we weren't assuming any reduction
in the backlog. You can see that
the line is very smooth if there were no
reduction in backlog. But we're actually
expecting those judges to make more decisions and
get more people on the rolls. One other interesting thing we noticed this year
when going through our projections was that let me make sure I've
got this straight, I always get the sign wrong, folks getting awarded at the hearings
level actually have significantly lower benefits on average than those
awarded initially. Because we're working
down that backlog, the average benefit overall is lower than we would
have expected it to be. A little interesting work
that happened this year. So putting this all together, what does this mean? We have lower applications, we have lower awards. Obviously, that leads into lower numbers of
beneficiaries overall. The black line on this
graph is what we were projecting in the
2008 trustees report. This is before we
had incorporated any recession of facts
into our projections. You can see we're projecting
the roles to pretty steadily go up and then
eventually level off. In fact, what we saw. Again, the blue and
the red lines are overlapping each other in
the historical period, but what we saw was that more people came on the
roles during the recession, but significantly
fewer since then. It actually brings
the overall number of beneficiaries down in
the projection period. 2018 projections are
even lower than in 2017. Steve Goss: What
other just a little editable pieces just
wanted to add onto the really interesting
point that Karen made about administrative
law judge, allowances tended to have monthly benefits
about 10 percent lower than those that
are allowed earlier. The disability
determination services that's actually been consistent over the last several years. And the way this really affected our projections is when
we discovered this. We saw over the last 3,
4 years during which the administrative law
judge allowances were all hopefully smaller
than usual share. That therefore tended to
make our average awarded benefit amount elevated from what it should really have been. In this year where
we're starting to get the backlog down, we had a more normal in 2017 relationship between the
number of allowances that administrative law judge versus disability determination
services that brought down the average reward of benefit level
from what we would rather expected and takes us to a lower state for future
years going forward. It really did have a
somewhat significant effect. This slide we don't really
spend a lot of time on. I think most of you are familiar with this sort of takes
a little bit more of an historical perspective of what you can see with the
blue here is our age, sex adjusted,
disability incidence rate going back to 1970,
it moves up and down. Not surprisingly, roughly
in consonance with what's going on with the recessions. But again, what
we're dealing with now at this point is
something that is beyond what we would
have been expecting from a session from the
earlier slides. Just wanted to point out also in terms of disability
prevalence rates, this is almost back to the
point earlier where we had almost 200 percent
increase between 1980-2010 in the number
of disabled workers. The prevalence rates went up somewhat during
that period of time in the future we're reprojection
prevalence rates to be about the same. However, we're showing
prevalence rates to be going up a little
bit in the future. This will be contingent
on what really happens with the incidence
rates in the future. If we are now moved down to a permanently lower level
of incidence rates, then the level that
we are currently still assuming for
the ultimate level, which is quite a bit
above what we've had very recently than these
prevalence rates are being overestimated
now, time will tell. To that point, just
wanted to share with you, because prevalence rates and our numbers of integration will be determined by what happens
with incidence rates. We wanted to share
with you on the little red with a
little red dots. These are the ultimate
disability incidence rates per thousand on an
age adjusted basis, of course, that we've had over the last several
trustees reports. You can see, and I think it was the
2012 trustees report. We jumped from about a 5.2
up to a 5.4 level based on recent experience and lots of people concerned
about disability. Maybe not the smartest move
in the world we did that, but you can see also on the
other little lines here, the solid lines, you could
see over the past, 10, 20 and 30 years, historical moving averages,
what has been happening, What's interesting is
while the numbers, especially for the
tenure average, you can see went
way up what was at a high level back in 2012, the impetus for people
thinking maybe we're going to have a
permanently higher level. The 20-year and third year, had not been so high
at those points, and all now have moved
down and converge, 10, 20 and 30 year histories
to about a 5.2 level, which begs the question of where do we think we
will be in the future? Are we in a temporary
little hole here on disability incidence rates and it's going to come back up, or are we in a quasi new normal? Nicole Maestas: I'm going
to talk a bit about this decline in SSDI Awards, which I think is a
really really big deal. It was a bit unexpected and it is in some ways the
biggest thing to happen in the DI program in recent memory. What I'll do is offer
my thoughts on what those reasons for the
decline might be, implications for research, and give you my
opinion about what the future outlook will be; is this the new normal, or are we going to revert
back to the prior? If I had to tell you, what were the three
big things that are driving this decline
in DI awards? This is what I would pick.
I would say demographics, the economy, and
then SSA policy. By that I mean this ALJ
Reform of the hearing level, and the ways in which
administrative law judges, ALJs make and document
their decisions. I'm going to focus on the
latter two: the economy, and the ALJ reforms in part because they're
rather intertwined, and I think you need to get a handle on both
of those to really understand what's
been happening here, and what's going to
happen in the future. Demographics are also important. I think Steve and Karen
showed that very clearly, the power of demographics here. They're also not as hard to understand because there's
somewhat predictable. Starting with the economy, we've known for some time the SSDI applications
are countercyclical. This is a picture produced
by Kathleen Mullen and Alexi Strand and I looking
at the Great Recession. Just like in prior recessions, you see that as the unemployment rate spiked
up in the great recession, we're showing here the
monthly unemployment rate in blue, so did the number of
disability claims. The Great Recession was really, in some ways no different than prior recessions in that regard. Here we're showing the number of claims relative to
their baseline level. The system was
getting about 120,000 disability claims per month
prior to the recession, and that rose by about 20,000-30,000
additional claims as the recession progressed. But what we didn't know is did this translate to
awards in quite the same way? That was because we hadn't yet been able to
follow recession, induced claims over time
to track how many of them, eventually, often many
years later, get awarded. That's what we did.
You see here when you organize those claims by the date at which
they were filed, and relate that to the
unemployment rate, you see that also awards spiked with the
great recession as well. Now, in the paper here, we used the fact
that the recession played out differently into different degrees of intensity, and different timings
across different states. We use a state
month variation in the unemployment rate to estimate the elasticities
underlying here. We found that the elasticity
of application with respect to
unemployment was 0.25, so with that, to get a
sense of that magnitude, at the peak of the recession, when the unemployment
rate had doubled, the system was getting about 25 percent
more applications that month than usual. It was also getting more awards, about 19 percent more
awards than usual. We calculate using these
estimates that the recession led about 1.4 million workers to apply for
disability benefits. About a million of those were new in the sense that had
there been no recession, they probably wouldn't
have applied. But a sizable chunk, about 28 percent would
have applied anyway. We obtained this
finding by estimating the dynamics of this effect. They would have applied any way, but only a few months later. What that implies is that it is not the case that
the reason we have such low applications
now is because they were all shifted forward in time during the
Great Recession. In fact, the same pattern
exists in Awards. There were over 500,000
induced awardees. About 400,000 of them probably wouldn't have come in had economic times
have been better, but 100,000 of them
would have come in any way just a little
bit later in time, only 1-2 months later. Now, what's as big as
these effects are? They are big and they've had important cost implications
for the system. In the scheme of things, those induced applications
were only 11.6 percent of all applications that
were received by the disability
system at that time. Between say, 2008 and 2012, and induced awards were
only 8.9 percent of all the awards made to applicants during
this time period. The recession was important. But, it can't possibly really be a major explanatory factor behind the decline
in the award rate. It's going to play a role, and it plays an important role. I'm going to show you how
it affects the award rate. The key thing being that recession induced
applicants are of course, a little bit healthier than
the average applicant. One other fact that I think is useful to keep in mind
in thinking about, well, what happens when the economy
takes another downturn, what's going to happen here? The Great Recession actually had relatively little impact
on the initial award rate. The disability examiner
on the initial review, didn't change their
behavior very much. But the pellet awards
increased by a lot. Actually, they increase at both reconsideration and
at the hearings level. As a result, about
53 more than half of the recession induced
beneficiaries were allowed on appeal. Much higher than what you usually find in a typical year, which is more like 37 percent of beneficiaries being
allowed on appeal. The important thing here is
that the administrative of law judges were particularly influential in driving the
effect of the Great Recession on the DI application
or DI award rate. It is true also this was
the fourth point here, that the induced applicants had less severe impairments
than average. Their allowance
rate was actually only 42 percent
compared to an average, about 54 percent in these data. It is also interesting
to consider what has been happening then
to employment. There has been a
very corroborating, thus the significance of
these business cycle effects. There has been a very
interesting recent turnaround in the employment of
people with disabilities. Here I'm plotting focus on
the colored lines here, the orange line is
data from the ACS. The blue line is from the CPS. The gray bars show the
last two recessions, and we're looking at the
employment rate measured in those survey data sets of
people with disability. Disability is defined by those that six question
disability sequence. You see that as with the
retirement programs, employment declined and
declined for many many years. Then in the mid '90s we saw
a turnaround in employment. We're seeing a very similar turnaround in the
employment of people with disabilities
occurring in about 2014. If you drill in to
the monthly data, and look at men and
women separately, the orange line at
the top is men, the red line at the
bottom is women, and here we're showing
the monthly jobs data 2008 to June, 2018. It's actually quite
pronounced and that increases on the order of about
5 percentage points. That's a relatively large gain
in employment compared to the base employment
rate for this group which hovers in the
mid '20s to mid '30s. On to SSA policy. The ALJ Hearing Reforms, I think are a much bigger
deal than the business cycle, and possibly the
most important and least heralded least discussed, least understood SSDI
policy reform of our time. What did SSA do? The Appeals Counsel use
data analytics to identify ALJ's who were making
non-policy compliant decisions. What that meant was that it turns out
there's something like 2,000 different outcomes of a disability case that can
be entered into the record. For many of those outcomes, there is decision tree pathing that needs to be followed. If you want to allow somebody
on a particular basis, that applicant has to
satisfy say three tests. If they pass the three tests, then you can award
on that basis. What they found
was that many ALJs were not following
the decision trees. Using their data analytic tools, they were able to
identify those ALJs, and give them feedback. They were also able to identify the ALJs who had outlier
allowance rates. Either they weren't
they were allowing statistically far
too many cases, statistically far too few cases. They gave feedback
to those as well. As a result, new training for ALJs was introduced in 2011, and the training focused on policy compliant
decision-making, and ensuring that the ALJs
were actually documenting all the required
regulatory steps into the judicial record. They also simultaneously hired many many new ALJs
into the system, and all of the new
ALJs were immediately trained under the new
system beginning in 2011. What you have then is massive turnover in
the judicial core, and also retraining of all the incumbents
and the new entrants. Hillary Hoynes, Alexi strand and I have been
digging into this, trying to understand the
nature of these reforms, and so far what we're finding is that the ALJs who stayed, that is they didn't retire. They had actually lower pre-period
allowance rates than the ones who left. The new ALJs had substantially lower allowance
rates than the ones who left by as much as we're finding seven percentage
points lower. Even the peers, even its
interesting spillover effects, the judges that
were targeted for feedback that would not
occurred if a judge in your office had
received this feedback then the other judges in the office also reacted by reducing their allowance rate. We're still trying to parse out these effects and understand how much of that decline in the hearing level allowance rate could this possibly explain. But we think it
has the potential to account for a pretty sizable
share of the decline in the hearing allowance
rate simply because so many of these
judges were treated. I think if you look
at the judicial core today post-2001, it is a very different core than it was before that time, both in terms of the
people deciding decisions, but also the ways in which they're making
these decisions. Here, what this is showing, this is putting these
two things together. This is back to the study with Kathleen Mullen
and Alexi Strand. You can see why it's
been difficult to sort out what's due to the reforms at the ALJ level
versus the Great Recession. What we've done here
is show in blue what the actual hearing
level allowance rate has been since 2007. Well, these are
applications filed in 2007, so the allowance rate
itself is coming from allowances made in future dates all the
way through 2013. Then we use our estimates from the other work to net out all of those recession-induced
applications and awards to compute a
counterfactual allowance rate. What would've been the
allowance rate had we not had the Great Recession? What you see is that the
allowance rate would have stayed relatively high and flat until about
the applications that were filed in 2010, which hit the hearing level in about 2011 when they
rolled out these reforms, and then it comes
down, and it comes down quickly and sharply. But with the recession-induced
applicants in mix, recall that these people
had lower allowance rates because they were healthier
than your average applicant. It's been very hard
to really say, well, could it possibly have been these ALJ reforms or not? There's more to do
here, of course, to try to figure out, well, how much can we really
attribute of that decline in the hearing level award rate to the specific ALJ reforms, but I think we're making
some good progress on that. I think this set of findings offers up a
number of implications. For one, internal policy changes can make a really
big difference. There was no act
of Congress that changed the screening level
of the disability system, and yet we have seen
what amounts to about a 20 percentage
point reduction in the hearing level
allowance rate. That's the first thing. Two, many people with disabilities appear to have work capacity. In other work, we found
that about 40 percent of SSDI applicants have some
degree of work capacity. What this suggests to
me is that we just need better measurement of the
specific work capacities that people have and
better linkage of those specific work capacities to the specific demands of jobs. At this point, our
system is rather blunt. I think we know a
lot more about what jobs demand and
we're much far more capable of measuring
work capacity than we've been able
to in the past. Three, increasingly, people with disabilities
are working and for many people, work is an alternative
to SSDI participation. I think one implication of the economic business
cycle effects that you see with respect
to the Disability Program, and also this latest increase in employment by people
with disabilities, is that people with disabilities benefit from excess
labor demand. When the labor
markets are tight, they work. Employers hire them. I think these demand pressures
are likely to continue as population aging intensifies. Population aging itself will
just put more pressure on the labor market as labor
force growth slows. Fourth suggests that
there is a need for greater understanding
of the employer role. We tend to, I think research to date has really
largely focused on the "moral hazard
problem of the applicant." But there is also a possible
moral hazard problem on the employer side. That is that employers don't fully internalize
the cost of not accommodating somebody who
has a disability and instead allow them to just go
on to the SSDI program. We have begun digging into this. It's been rather hard
to study because we don't have data that links the characteristics of the
firms that people come from in a very easily
accessible way. But what we do observe and we've turned
to IRS data to do this large differences across industries and the DI entry
rates of former workers. Here's just a little picture
from this work which is a little hard to read, but let me tell you
what you're seeing. What we're graphing here is the SSDI entry rate of
former workers by industry. You see quite a
lot of variation. The top industry for sending
workers to the DI program. These are people
who were working three years prior
and were observed to be receiving disability
benefits three years later. Mining is the number
1 at 1.86 percent of former mining workers
enrolling in SSDI benefits, followed by transportation, management of companies, administrative support,
construction, health care, all the way down to a low of 0.77 for
educational services. That's variation of
more than two-fold in these DI entry rates
across industries. Now you might say, well mining, of course, it's mining on top. But there are some
surprises in here, for example, management
of companies. That's the number
3 at 1.7 percent. The top occupations in
that industry are things like bookkeepers,
managers, accountants, administrative and
support also it has a range of managerial and
janitorial positions. Construction, of course, you
might expect to see that. But it turns out
actually that much of our intuition about
which industries should be on this list is
formed by what we know about injury rates from the worker's
compensation systems. We've done a little
bit of arraying those against this list, and this is not going to be a perfect correlation at all. Of course, that makes sense. We have a workers' compensation
system to handle those. DI claims are not
necessarily work-related. They can be, but
they're not always. In the future, I
expect that some of these employment gains could be reversed during
the next downturn. But I think there will be less impact of a future
recession on the SSDI program, impact because of these
appellate reforms. Recall that the hearing level, the appellate system was really a big factor in driving the number of people
who came onto the program during
the Great Recession. That really, I
think, has changed. This improvement in
judicial decision-making, I think is a permanent change. Literally, the humans making the decisions
are largely different. There are all kinds of new data quality analytic tools
that have been deployed to both improve the consistency of decision-making
across the decisions and also help measure and track productivity
of the workforce. The question of attorneys
always comes up and there was a very prominent bankruptcy of the firm Vendor&Vendor
a few years ago. Some have speculated that perhaps the reduction
in attorney activity could have something to do with the decline
in award rates. But this, I think, is actually a consequence of the change in the hearing level allowance rate and not the cause of it. If you think about it, when the award rate declines, attorneys lose money,
they're less likely to get compensated on
cases since they're compensated only if they win. Lastly, I do think we
should see some benefits of technological progress
in the future that should make it easier for some people with
disabilities to work. But this too is an area
where we simply need far more research
and investigation to understand how that is playing out and how
it might play out in the future as automation continues to
increase. Thank you. Jeffrey Liebman: I want
to make three points. The first is that it's pretty
remarkable how stable DI, incidence rates and DI
spending as a share of GDP has been once you adjust for the business cycle
over the last 25 years, it's going to be the first
point I'm going to make. The second is that stability masks big offsetting
changes in both cases, it's more a coincidence than some natural
feature of the program. It means that I think
looking forward, if some of the big
forces that have been in going in
offsetting directions, one turns out to go
faster than the other. We wouldn't necessarily
expect that kind of stability going forward. Third, I'm going to agree with Nicole about
the importance of policy implementation
and present some findings in that direction. These are two pictures from my 25th drove economic
perspectives piece. They show the incidence
of disability insurance, meaning the percentage
of eligible workers who were awarded
benefits in each year, and as has come
up several times, it's tricky to look at
the raw numbers because the age distribution
is changing and because of business
cycle effects. What happens in the right
graph on the right, is there I have age-adjusted, and I've also controlled for the unemployment
rate and the lag done unemployment rate
within five-year age ranges. What you can see, is there are these big policy reforms that first tightened eligibility and then listen
to them again in the '80s. But since about 1990, male incidents has
been incredibly fat. Once you take out the
business cycle effect, we have about a 20,
25-year period. Now, if you look
at the later data that they actually put forward, where the incidence rate
just for the business cycle, has been incredibly flat. But that downturn in
2010 is interesting. That's showing that the
take-up of DI during the Great Recession was lower than we would've expected based on previous relationships
between unemployment rate. In other words, the
cyclical sensitivity was less than we would expect, which I think is consistent with Nicole's evidence
that something else was going on there. I wrote this paper
before I knew anything, at least about any
of this ALJ stuff, but something we already knew something needed to
be explained there. I think Nicole has probably
just explained it for us, which is something that
happened that offset the normal rise and take up partially offset
during the recession. For women, in a data science, have been converging toward men. I don't want to
argue that that's literally what's going on. Because there are different health
conditions going on here. But the basic trend
here has been that in this period where
male incidence was completely constant
during the '90s, female incidents
was converging just numerically toward the
male incidence rate. One of the remarkable things in Steven Karen's slides, I
don't think they highlighted, but we are in the slides if you got to get a sneak
peek ahead of time, is that actually male
and female incidents are now equal for
the first time. The female fully caught up
in that is a I don't know. I guess that's a milestone
that means something. We had this incredible
stability here. The other thing that's been
incredibly stable has been spending on DI as
a share of GDP. Or more accurately, spending for males as being incredibly constant and then for
females as they entered the labor force and become more eligible if there isn't a bit. Here's a figure that
the darker band there, the darker part of
the bottom is DI, spending on male benefits
as a percentage of GDP. This isn't adjusted
for anything. This is just the
absolute spending. You can see it was 0.4 of
GDP in the late '70s, 1980. It was 0.4 of GDP on the
verge of the Great Recession, female spending
has been going up. There's more females have
been in the labor force and covered here this is in numbers. You can see the average and late seventies
point for one, the average in right before
the recession, 0.441. Total has gone up about 1/2 percent of GDP to 0.68 percent of GDP on the verge
of the recession. During the recession with
the cyclical increase in claiming spending went up
to 0.87 percent of GDP. It's already come down to 0.74 as the economy
has recovered and the actuaries are predicting
that we're back to the pre-recession level
of spending it at 0.69. Over this period, if
you go back to 1980, so we're going over a
close to 40 year period. The total increase
in spending on this program is under
0.2 percent of GDP. If you think of spending
on Medicare and Medicaid, that goes up by 0.2 of
GDP every two years. That's the total
over 40 years here. There's no fiscal issue here. It's got up a bit as women
entered the labor force, but otherwise it's
been constant. So fairly constant incidence, fairly constant spending, but I want to argue
that both of those are almost a coincidence and that some fundamental
entity here. First of all, if you think
about the constant incidence of male claiming of male
receipt of DI benefits, what's happened is there's been a lot of health improvements
in some conditions, like circulatory
conditions, also true in cancer-related
conditions. There has been an incredible increase in musculoskeletal, those that just
happened to cancel. If one had gotten
faster than the other, we wouldn't be talking
about constant incidence. We'd be talking about it rising. Now, some of it could be, there are people who for
a variety of reasons, the work is pretty crummy, they got bunch of chronic
health conditions, they're claiming one thing
versus the other because it's become easier to
claim one than the other, and so maybe some of it is an
offset of the same people. But some of this has gotta
be just a coincidence that the sine of one
health trend and the other happened to cancel. As we see things like incentives being surprisingly low
the last few years, I think it's worth us
starting to look to see if some of these health trends
are no longer canceling. Maybe the increase in musculoskeletal conditions or mental health conditions
has leveled off. We're still getting some of the other decreases happening. That could easily be
part of the story that we should start
looking for in the data when you have the more
dis-aggregated story. I would argue the near constancy of incidences is a coincidence from two big offsetting changes. That's true in the
GDP numbers as well. The spending as a share
of GDP is of course, the product of the
number of people getting benefits and the
average benefit rate. The spending numbers
aren't age-adjusted. You'd expect, we know the baby boomers all hit
the high disability age. Why didn't we see spending go up proportional to the number
of beneficiaries going up? The answer is that the
average benefit relative to GDP has come down
quite considerably. The reason for that is
one, income inequality. The earnings level of a typical DI
beneficiary relative to the overall earnings level
has been going down. Secondly, the earnings share of compensation has
been going down as health benefits or a bigger
share of compensation. Third, worker compensation as a share of GDP has
been going down. For all three of those reasons, benefit levels relative to GDP have fallen by
enough to offset the increase in recipients
as a share of GDP, and that's led to
stability on spending. I think we know from
the demographics that the number of beneficiaries
going to be pretty constant. But there's no
particular reason to think we're going to
continue to have a decline in benefits relative to GDP
that could change if trends in inequality or in worker bargaining power
changed over time. That feature of the
stability may not persist. Third thing I guess
I wanted to point out is going back here. Steven Karen pointed out that the incidence rates over
the last few years, which are down at
about 4.2 percent, are really off the
charts compared to anything we've
experienced recently. Now when you look
at those numbers, you have to adjust for
the fact that we're at a strong part of
the business cycle. If you adjusted that
would be more like 4.7 or 4.8 if you increase them to the average point
in the business cycle. But they are still quite low, which I think is
certainly evidence that something beyond
the business cycle has happened during this period, which in part is the ALJ story, but maybe something
else going on as well, that we haven't all
discovered yet. I think it's illustrative
to compare what we've seen during and then the aftermath of the
Great Recession to DI claims to what we've seen
with SNAP food stamp claims. For SNAP, basically, there was a big uptake
in benefits that was exactly what you would
have predicted based on the relationship during
previous recessions between SNAP take up and
the unemployment rate. Unlike DI where there was a
muted response and staff, it was basically in line
with past claiming behavior. But as we've recovered
from the recession, SNAP has not come
down nearly as fast as we would have expected
based on past recessions. You can see here that the
SNAP receipt went from 8.7 percent of the US
population up to 15 percent at the peak
of the recession. Now it's come down
only about halfway to about 12 percent. Whereas we saw DI come down further than we
would have predicted based on past recessions
to what is it, at least in modern history,
a record low incidence rate. My best guess of what's
going on differently here actually reinforces Nicole story that policy
implementation matters. During the second Bush
administration, during the 2000s, there was a deliberate
policy initiative to make it easier for the working poor who were eligible for
SNAP to receive benefits. In particular, it
used to be that if you wanted to go get benefits and after
you were signed up, you'd have to take
a day off from work to go recertify
every few months. That wasn't really
plausible for a lot of people to do that and people would get
cycle off of benefits. They did things like say
you can just call on the phone to recertify, rather than have to leave work and show up in the
welfare office to do it. More recently you can now
apply for benefits completely online in most states. I'm guessing that the
continuation of those, it's again, it's the policy
implementation story, the making easier for
the working poor and stay signed up for
SNAP is again, so there's this underlying
increased ease of application that's been
going on over this period that's happening at the same
time as the business cycle. Those two things combined
are explaining why we have a different
pattern over the cycle than we would've expected. Final observation. I'd like to make is that I think there are a
lot of things in the USDA's system where the incentives are not
perfectly aligned. Nicole referred to the
employer situation. Clearly, there are
incentives that affect individuals in their
application decisions. They're screwy things in the way that SSA
budget is designed such that the funds that are spent to figure out
whether people should get benefits are on the
discretionary side of the budget which is capped. But then the benefits are on the uncapped entitlement
side of the budget. If you underspend on SSA
administrative capacity, and then that
causes you to spend more on the mandatory
side of the budget, that's good from a
congressional standpoint because we live within
the budget caps, but we actually ended
up spending more. There are whole lot of
things that are messed up. It's been hard, I think, to make serious progress on thinking about how
to improve some of these incentives
in a period where everyone was talking about
the system being out of control financially
and it just made it much more contentious
policy environment over the last 10-15 years, than probably it needed to be. Because of that, I think it
was hard for anybody to say yes to the pilots and experimentation that
has been needed. I'm hoping that in this
period where it's pretty clear that there's
no fiscal crisis, that if anything numbers
are coming down, it'll be possible
to work on some of the hard incentive problems. I think the hardest one
is that if you look at the people who are
marginal beneficiaries, it's truly got some
work capacity, but they don't have a hell
of a lot of work capacity. The potential earnings
are like $15,000 a year, $18,000 a year on average for the marginal DI applicants who are the ones who
if you turn down, they can still go back to work. If you think about
interventions that might help those folks
stay in the labor market, it's hard for them to
pay for themselves if the incremental work
capacity isn't that great. I think for many of the
folks on the margin, they're actually better
off if they can stay in the labor force. We offer people who are having
chronic health problems, both physical and
mental health problems and not well-placed in
the modern labor market. Right now what we offer
them is, here's the deal. If you promise never
to work again, we'll give you a lot of money
or you can muddle along. I do think that there are
solutions out there that probably make the individuals better off by keeping
the labor force. I doubt that they will
pay for themselves. It's only if we
actually think that the individuals being
better off by still have not being socially isolated
and not being out of labor force is something
we're willing to pay for that it'll be worth
doing these interventions. Because just given the
potential earnings capacity, even with interventions
isn't that high, it's hard. I think it'll be
hard to make things completely revenue neutral
on that side and we'll have to decide whether the benefit of helping people
stay on their feet and stay in the labor
market is something we're willing to pay for even if it might be cheaper just to give them lifetime benefits. I think that there's a
lot of experimentation to do in that in that area. I'm hoping we're entering an era where those policy
discussions are things that are more feasible than they've
been in the last decade. 