Lars A. Lochstoer: This is
going to be a paper about anomalies that actually doesn't explicitly talk about
average returns or Alpha, which begs the question, why are we interested
in anomalies then? Actually attack we're going
to take is we're going to think about why
anomaly portfolios, or long short
anomaly portfolios, which are zero beta portfolios,
why they vary at all? What's the source that drives return variation in
those portfolios? I'm going to try to
convince you that that is an interesting question that can help us shed some light on why we have some of
the type of models we need to explain the anomaly returns and the average returns
to in the end. By way of trying
to explain this, I want to think about
what are sources of shocks to driving
the pricing kernel. There's lots of tax on this. What we're going to think about, we can go back to
a stylized fact, which if you read the John Cochran's
presidential address, you will see that if you
look at market returns, it depends on the sample, etc, but about half of market return variation is
due to discount rate shocks. The other part is due
to cash flow shocks. That type of viewing
of the world has had a profound effect on a lot of our models of aggregate
stock market. If you think about
Campbell Cochrane, Bansal and Yaron, and also Jessica Wechter's paper on
time and disaster risk, the fact that discount rates
at the market level vary in a persistent manner has caused these papers to introduce either a time and risk aversion, or time varying
quantity of risk. That's fine. With the
modern pricing kernel, market risk is only one
pretty small fraction of the total variation of what we think of
as a pricing kernel. To give you an example,
if you think of the former French 5-Factor Model where in addition to the market we have
book-to-market value, we have size, we have
profitability in investment, only 85 percent of the variance of
that pricing kernel is due to the market factor. I'm sorry, only 15 percent
is due to the market factor, 85 percent is due to
the non-market factors. What we want to do really is do the same thing as the top here. We want to think about,
if we view the world in this cash flow fundamental risk versus this discount
rate shocks. What does the modern
pricing kernel look like, and how does knowing
something about that inform us about the
models we want to write up? This is going to relate also
to individual papers that argue about the sources of
non-market factor returns. There's a number of
theories, we're at myriad. I think that's like
10,000 or more. Maybe that's a
stretch, but a lot of theories trying to
explain the same thing, they're rational and
they're behavioral. I'm still getting some more
summary statistics from the data that can help us inform what models are at work. That's where we're trying to go. We're going to argue
that cash flow versus discount rate
decomposition is useful. I think most people
here actually know what I'm talking about when I say cash flow versus
discount rate shocks, but to make sure we're
all on the same page, I'm just going to show this
for 30-second tutorial. In the simplest
possible way which is, if you think about
a one-period model, the simplest one that
present value one period. I know the price is equal
to the expected dividend or cash flow divided by 1 plus the expected return
or the discount rate. If prices of claims
are moving around, it must be that either the expected cash flow has changed, or the expected return or
discount rate has to change. When we talk about
cash flow shocks, that's the shocks to the
top there to numerator. If you're talking about
discount rate shocks that are shock to
expect to return. Something I'm going
to talk about, here's negative cash flow versus discount
rate correlation, which you're going to
find a lot in the data. What that says is that if
cash flows of this animal, we're looking at our portfolio, the expected cash flow goes up, the expected return goes down. That type of dynamic, we're going to see a lot of, and that's what we have in mind. One more point for those
of you who are not entirely on board with
what's going on here, when you do a empirical
decomposition like this, expected return is not
necessarily rational. Here are two very handsome men, on the left is a Keynes, and on the right we've got Fama. Keynes he's talking
about animal spirits. If prices are jumping
around because of investors getting excited about something or not yet
not excited about it, that is going to be denoted
that discount rate shock. We're not going to see
that in a fundamental. Risk aversion, which also show up as a discount
rate shocks. We're not about behavioral
versus rational, but we're more about is
it in the cash flows or is it in the
valuation levels itself. The final tutorial here
is what we going to do is something that's been
done many times before. You can express
shocks to returns as cash flow shocks minus discount rate shocks is a
log linear approximation. It just going to raise
our denominator. That's why it has
to have the sign. We're going to think about a variance decomposition
where hey, the reasons return varies either because there are
shocks to cash flows, or because they're shocks
to discount rates. Then there's a covariance
term and I think we can learn something
from all these terms. Before I get into exactly
what we're doing, I want to give you a sense of what can we learn potentially? What are the things we
can glean from this? Let's take a Keynes world of
value premium for instance, or value minus growth. Or we can think about
DSSW is noise traders. That's a model where prices
are just investors all of a sudden get very excited about growth firms and unexcited
about value firms. Those prices go away
from each other, and that's a positive to a gross minus value,
or it can go in. If a lot of variation is due
to this noise trader stuff, we're going to find
that as being, if you look at the
long short portfolio, we're going to look at a lot
of discount rate variation. This type of mispricing, if that's the main thing that would be in the discount
rate variation here. If cash flow variation
is dominating, you can think of models
that are talking about some fundamentals
in the earnings process. For instance, Kogan
and Papanikolaou and multiple other people have talked about new versus
old technologies. If you think of growth
as being loading on new technologies
that displays this old, those type of
displacement shocks or cross-sectional they lead to cross- section difference
in cash flows, potentially also discount rate. But the cash flow is the
fundamental driving source. If we think that overreaction to cash flow news is a big part of understanding
market dynamics. Well, what does an
overreaction mean? Overreaction, let's
say it's a bad news about the future. Investors pushed the price
of that stock too low. That means that
discount rates go up as the same time as expected
cash flow goes down. You can see that in this
negative correlation between cash flows and discount
rates at each anomaly level. There are other things
that our model are talking about, for instance
cross-correlations. Now you think about
market cash flow shocks. Are they correlated with an
anomaly cash flow shocks? There are several theories
that says they do. Lu Zyang has a beautiful paper. There's a lot of papers
in this literature on production-based
asset pricing, that has an idea that maybe if a firm has a hard
time adjusting, they're more exposed to the aggregates of
cash flow shocks. That could imply a
positive correlation between cash flows at the anomaly level and cash
flows at the market level. I'll conclude and then I'll get into what
we're doing here. We're saying, what if
you think risk aversion or sentiment overall
is driving everything? Well, you think that
discount rate shocks at these different portfolios
were all be correlated. People get more risk
averse, presumably, market prices drop in
a systematic fashion, and just is high correlation. That's what we're hoping
to get out of it. We're not going to test
any one theory in detail, we just want to get at
some summary stats. Here's what we're going to do, we're going to estimate a firm level panel
vector autoregression. We're going to impose a firm-level present
value condition. That's the economic restriction
we're putting on this, that present value set to hold. We know the return some substitute cash flow
minus discount rate. Then from the firm-level, we can aggregate firms
shocks into a portfolio. We have to use
approximation here, but it's accurate because
we go from logs to levels and we're going to try to focus results that are robust. This methodology has a
vector auto-regression. You have to be careful
with the specification and we tried a lot of things and I'm sure maybe our discussion will tell us
in what ways were wrong. But we would do think that we really tried to
be a robust here. We do this because there's
more power here than just estimating enough
portfolio by itself. That leads to very
high standard errors. I talk through this, so these are the
equations behind us. Either you already
know it and it's fine or you don't and
then it's too late. There's the equation.
The key thing here is that we're going to basically estimate
future expected returns, and then we're going to
project them forward in a particular way to the
VAR allows us to do. We're going to extract cash
flow shocks as a residual. Because at the firm level
that's a tricky animal. That's equivalent to
defining clean surplus. If you want to think about
earnings as a residual, this is from Ohlson and
Vuolteenaho equation here. It's the same thing basically. What we get is a panel VAR where every firm at some time t has
a bunch of characteristic, they have the return we put in this clean surplus earning. X is a bunch of
other predictors, which I'll talk about
what we'll do explicitly as Fama-French five
plus momentum. We're going to have
profitability, investment, lag return indicator, and
book-to-market and size. Then book-to-market
and the present value of the restriction just
means that there's one less shock here and there are rows because these
things have to add up. That's how we do that. I'll just click through this. Obviously, specification
on the VAR is a critical thing and we try a bunch of different things, which I'll discuss a little bit. When we go from
firm-level to portfolio, you've got log shocks. A portfolio is a weighted
average of stock returns, but not in logs. To get to levels, we just do a second-order approximation
that is pretty good. I will also happily
flip past that, but we get to really
high correlations with the actual
portfolio returns. That's how we think of it. What I will say
is the following, when we aggregate to
any portfolio level, the shocks in that
portfolio will either diversify
or they will not. If you do two random portfolios, presumably, the shocks with basically diversify
when you go long short. There wouldn't be
any volatility, there would be nothing
to talk about. We know the anomaly
portfolios are volatile, 10 percent are more volatility. We know we're lining up some
correlated shocks here. Those correlations
could diversify out of discount rates, or it could diversify
on cashflows. We don't really know and that's part of what
we're going to find here. I already mentioned what
we have in the VAR, returns earnings book-to-market, size divided by GDP to
get some stationary, profitability,
investment, momentum. Realized variance we put in because we're doing something in log, you might
want to have it. It turns out it does not
necessarily matter that much. I want to say something
we're going to look at long-short
portfolios which are quintile 1 and 5 sorted on a
particular characteristic. We go long the natural side that typically makes more money and short the other side. We also allow for some dummies with book-to-market to interact. We can allow for some
of the coefficients to be different if
you're in the extremes. But that just turns out not to be a critical thing
for our results. In the aggregate, we have
the real risk-free rate. We also have specifications with aggregate book-to-market and
a bunch of other things, but this is our
main specification. The data is from
62 through 2015. We've dropped the bottom
NYSE size quintile. Drop utilities and financials. That's often if you think about production functions
are often outside. I don't think that
really changes things. We've done some
stuff with them in. Again, we look at
long-short portfolio and all the portfolios. Let's go. What do we get? We
started with anomalies, and I'm going to talk about
pricing kernel after that. If you look at the
anomaly return balanced decomposition and I couldn't read
anything when I was in the back there because
my eyes are dying on me. This is book-to-market
profitability, investment, size, momentum. The red bar, this is a fairness
decomposition. These three bar should
add to one and they do. The red is the discount
rate component, the blue is the
cashflow components, and the greenish
thingy (sic) hear is the covariance component. What you see is that
for all of these, the cash-flow component
is dominating. Remember these things
have zero market beta. Why are these things volatile? Well, they must line up somehow with some
fundamental cashflow shock. These aren't industries too. Remember that these
long-short portfolios aren't industry
portfolios. We know that. They could have some
industry exposure, but that's not the main thing. We know that their cashflows are lining up in a particular way. We see that the
covariance term says, we know cashflows
are more important. The covariance term is positive, it means that the correlation
between discount rates and cash flows is negative. That means that when
there's bad cashflow news, that means discount rates go up. What are we to make of this? Well, a couple of
things we can note. It seems inconsistent will raise pure noise trader story. I'm not saying there
are no noise traders, but it's not like the
dominant thing causing co-variation is some crazy
investor movement in prices. There is actually a
fundamental component and that fundamental components
earnings seems to be highly correlated with
the discount rates. This is more consistent, maybe with a model where investors might be
overreacting to cashflow. I don't have time in
the presentation, but what we show is that this correlation is due
to long run cashflows. That's consistent
with, for instance, Daniel Hirshleifer
and Subrahmanyan, where you have overconfident
investors that learn about a long-run cash-flow component as opposed to just
the short run. That's what's driving
miss valuation. This is happening at firm
and portfolio levels. It's also consistent with firm betas increasing
in bad times. That things happens pretty naturally and production-based asset pricing model is too. That bad news about firm earnings makes
the firms less able to adjust to shocks. It's potentially
consistent with Kogan and Papanikolaou because
this is where growth being less risky. That's where we are. We're
going to do a couple of more cuts to see if we can
learn something else here. What about the mean-variance
efficient combination? Here's three
mean-variance portfolio, the left one is the market
and it's the MVE of the anomaly portfolios x market and then there's a total one. Broadly that's the same pattern. Let me say one thing
which I think is notable, if you go from the markets to the MVE with
everything in it, the amount of discount rate
variation is changing. That it was not my prior. My prior is the following. You have a bunch of factors out there to have
cash flow shocks. Discount rate shocks are
common across the factors. You put them all together, cash flow component
is going to drop, discount rate component
is going to go up. That is not what we see,
we see the opposite here. I find that a pretty
interesting observations which I'm going to link
later to the fact that it doesn't seem like the
discount rate shocks to the market have much to do with this current shocks anomalies. Later being now. Here is the Market CF on
top and Market DR, and what we're looking at is the MVE combination of
those five factors, momentum and the
Fama-French extra flow, the MVE combination of
those extra market. Market cashflows versus
anomaly cashflows, this MVE portfolio
have zero correlation. Market discount
rates, there's just going to raise
insignificant zero, but it is like a negative. You can say, if
the Beta is zero, why should there be any
correlation of all, there's a lot of stories that
tell us that there should be some correlation
that the discount rate level or the casual level. We just don't find
a lot of that. That seem pretty
robust across a number of specifications to us. These are some numbers, but
why does it make sense? Let me give you a couple
of examples that I think is really intuitive that
this is what's going on. I'm going to start
at the bottom here. What I'm plotting from
64 or so to 2015 is the discount rate
shocks to the market and MVE combination
of the anomalies. I want to focus on this
period, this is a .comboom. The blue line is the discount
rate shocks in the market. What happened in .comboom? Discount rate shocks went down, negative because prices
just kept going up. It's a bubble, arguably,
I didn't say that word. I want to take it back.
It's not a bubble. I don't know, but this
strikes, didn't go down. What happened to say value. Thinking about this
as MVE combination, but think about value
during the .comboom, that was a time where
value is losing money. But the spreads between market-to-book ratios of growth and value was increasing. Actually, the expected return to value strategy was going up
as you are losing money. That's a very
negative correlation. These episodes cause this
type of dislocations again. I can briefly also note
in the financial crisis, very bad for market cashflows. Managed devices was a
hard time's type shock, as someone has said, and
nothing any anomalies. Anomalies was because, it was a market level shock and anomalies
you can see that the return to the
anomalies wasn't that rough either
during this period. The price risks in
the MVE portfolio originate from cashflow shocks mainly to the underlying firms. I think that's good news for a model which has
production-based type flavor, this is not all about craziness. At least if there
is some craziness. It seems to be correlated with the cashflows in
a particular way. It's not like a message,
just come up with things. Maybe they have a hard time getting at long-term earnings. Broadly uncorrelated markets,
CFD, or shocks with MVE. I think that's hard to square. It does not approve, but it
seems harder to square with a classic model where
the discount factor is risk aversion times
whatever factors are in there. If this guy is hitting
every one of those factors. You would think that there'll
be a common component that DR shocks that
is very strong. It looks maybe more
something like this where markets and anomaly, risk prices are moving
more independently. It's not a proof, but
it's suggestive evidence. I wanted to note a couple
of things at the end here in terms of correlation
with aggregates. I think it's important that
our VAR makes some sense. If you look at
market cash flows. They're very strongly correlated
significantly so with GDP growth and
consumption growth. That makes some sense. When the economy is going well, there are positive
shocks to earnings, etc. Then I think it's an interesting significant here to send a negative correlation with the change in the labor share. If labor gets more of the Pi, that's a bad news for the
cashflows of the market. That also makes sense.
I quite like that. The other shock that shows up as the default spreadsheet shows up in the way you
would expect the factor that's got a bad times. Broker, dealer leverage factor lines up exactly across market. The MVE x market is has
this positive correlation. If we for a minute sticking
into that one dropped, a DR has got the same for
the anomaly portfolios, at least it's got
the right sign. I think the one thing
that lines the most up it's broken your
leverage factor, but it doesn't really
explain the fundamental. It just seems, there's
some guys that are unconstrained and
their marginal utility is moving with returns. That's not about the cash
flow discounted rates. That's a fundamental explanation of the underlying firm dynamics. If you look at the
MVE portfolios, there's just not a
whole lot there. The only thing I really see
is that with sentiments, there is this one
sentiment goes up. The discount rates drop on the MVE portfolios and
that makes some sense too, people get really excited. Then maybe, the anomaly portfolios have a decrease in their
discount rates. That's our main thing. I think I've maybe have
thirty-seconds or so or no. We do a lot of things. I'm sure we don't do enough we will here. Without the interaction domains, we add market book-to-market to a specification does if you can get like an overall market, that turns out to really mess up the long-term
predictability if that gets badly behaved because
of the persistence, mess up the long-term
profitability of earnings at the market level. We prefer our
specification without it. We add interaction. We didn't fix the effects. Fixed effects are tricky
because the dynamic panel, you have this
stumbled bias thing when you have lots
of fixed effects. We did them trying to use shrinkage and I'll
have a look at bias. This is a time T forecast or to fix the fact that
each point in time. Our main specification
has chosen basis a little bit longer and predictability in play from the VAR roles of data,
so I'll conclude. I think we're in a part in the literature now where
we want to write up models of the cross section will have a cross-section of firms. These models should explain co-movement of these factors mainly due to cash flow shocks. The cash flow discounted
rate shocks are strongly negatively correlated
in our estimation. There's not a
particularly strong link to market CF and DR shocks. Whatever is going on there is approximately uncorrelated. We like two types of models. Investor long-run
cash-flow overreactions is pretty consistent
because that's a firm or a factors specific thing or bad long-run cash-flow
news increases firm risk and is correlated
as anomalous, independent on our portfolios. Hard to just find
malls with timing, risk aversion, or overall
sentiment, we think. This is where the
long-term asset management conference
which says, if anomaly cashflows
are uncorrelated, you don't like
cashflow shocks as a long-term investor
because they're permanent, these kinds of shocks
or not so bad. But if anomaly
cashflow structure own correlated with market
cashflow shocks, then you can put them
together and achieve less overall volatility of cashflows shocks now
should be a good thing. 