Gita Gopinath:
Thank you so much. Thanks, Jim, for that
very kind introduction. It's a real honor for me to
give this lecture, Kate. Marty was an exceptional
colleague and a dear friend. I would describe him as an
incredibly helpful colleague. I remember when I came
to Harvard in 2005, I was trying to get
access to data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics and that required Harvard to countersign a
contract with the BLS. They were giving me an
possibly hard time to do it. I spoke to Marty and Marty said, why don't you just do
this with the NBER? It took 24 hours
and I was all set. That was an example. The other thing that I
find incredibly memorable about Marty is that he was
so respected worldwide. I went as a part of
the Neemrana group to China when I was in India and people
really admired him and respected to them from all
these different countries. The impact he had obviously
had a big influence. One of the people I
think of as I've moved from academia to
the policy space. In terms of the lecture today, I am going to talk
about the topic is related to capital flows. I'm sure all of you know this, but in case you don't, actually want to probably
the most cited paper of Marty's is the
Feldstein-Horioka puzzle, which basically was looking
at the relationship between savings and investment
in the countries was an empirical relation. He just noted that there was very high correlation between
savings and investments, savings rates and investment
rates in countries. Under the benchmark that
you would think, well, if this was a perfectly
integrated world in terms of capital markets, we really shouldn't see that higher correlation between savings and investments
in the country. That spurred a very big body of work on trying to understand different
explanations for it, including some on
home bias and so on. But I remember this
paper as I was thinking about what lecture
to give today. What I'm going to go into
is a little more current, which is a question that many policymakers in emerging and developing
economies are grappling with. Actually, the reason I'm
giving you this lecture is because it gives you a flavor of how questions arise when you're at the IMF
and topics come up. Then you see a
disconnect between what the policy world wants and
what the academic world has put together and we go and dig in and do some
additional research. Once you do the research, you have to get the board
of the IMF to sign on a new direction in which the meeting policy
should be going. Then you go to the
operationalization phase, which is you start when you deal with
190 member countries, you have a new framework that
you use to deal with it. At this current juncture, this question is very important. I put this slide up. This is called the turn in
the global financial cycle, which is basically saying that
after about two years when central banks around the world kept interest rates
are extremely low and financial conditions
were really sanguine, we're beginning to see global financial
conditions tightened. About 75 percent of
the central banks that we have interest rates
that are going up, they're raising interest rates. You can see that right at
the end of this graph, this thing moving up, which is basically
that you have, if you look at, for instance, the global and the IMF, emerging markets excluding
China, it's turning up, so we have a worsening or a tightening in
financial conditions. The right graph also
tells you something about where we are right now. This is the fraction of emerging markets whose
yields exceed 10 percent. This is their foreign
currency bond yield exceeds 10 percent and those are coming up
to around 30 percent of these countries. Alongside, we have
what classically happens when you have a
global financial cycle, is you have a
strengthening dollar. Why is all of this particularly concerning is because we've
had a period before now. When you've had an increase in external debt of these emerging
and developing economies, both in foreign currency
and in local currency debt. Now you can see that there was some learning that happened, which is the last decade, everybody realized that having too much of your
debt and foreign currency can be a problem, so you want to switch to the local currency
data local currency that has also gone up. Why do emerging and developing countries worry
about a period of this kind, is that we know that
interest rates are going up. In our models, there will be
an R star that's going up. But usually, along with R star going up or
interest rates going up, you have a phenomenon called taper tantrums and sudden stops. Let me just explain to
you what those are. This is 2013 taper
tantrum at the time when the Fed was beginning to talk
about tightening policy. This was Ben Bernanke, gave a speech where he
said something about the fact that we may start quantitative tightening sooner, which means the interest
rates may go up sooner, but no action was
actually taken. But just the expectation that
there would be tightening led to increase in UIP spreads, uncovered interest
parity spreads, which is the excess return on local currency bonds issued by emerging and developing
economies relative to dollar interest rate. That excess return goes up
by around 200 basis points, which is quite a
bit in this period. That's called the taper tantrum. This happens quite a bit for emerging and
developing economies. Any communication coming up
major central banks leads their borrowing costs to
move quite significantly, even if it's only for a
brief period of time, it tends to move and
that creates a need for intervention by
their authorities. The right graph is what's
called sudden stops, which is much more
serious than the tantrum. The sudden stop is
supposed to be an episode where it's a
non-linear phenomenon, is like you hit big
borrowing constraint and you get a much more
non-linear response, which then leads into having
a very big growth impact. You can see that those
with the episodes of the sudden stops, the global financial
crisis shows up as one. The temper tantrum
is not a sudden stop because you didn't really
have a big growth impact. These are financial
market responses that these countries
are dealing with, which a typical advanced economy with deep financial markets
doesn't even bother about. This is the problems that
their markets are deep enough. One set of investors
want to pull out, there's enough of the
other ones that come in and you don't have this
sudden stop or taper tantrum. The question that gets posed is our interest rates and
flexible exchange rates enough to manage a Turn in
the Global Financial Cycle. If you go to any textbook, by textbook I mean
undergraduate textbook in international economics, there's nothing you
have to do when you have flexible exchange rates. You move your policy rate around if you need to, and
that should be enough. That's just the
right thing to do to manage a global financial cycle. In fact, again, this comes from Ben that at the time when we have the
opposite phenomenon, which was right after the GFC when the Fed was
doing a whole lot of quantitative easing and at that time there was capital that was going into emerging and developing
economies flowing in, these countries
complained and they said, this is the problem for us, all this capital flow that's
coming in because you're keeping all levels of interest rates low is leading to overheating
in our economies. That's a huge problem for us. Ben said, well, the reason
this is a problem for you is because you don't let your
exchange rates appreciate. If you let your exchanger
rates appreciate, you'd be just fine
and that would give you the insulation
that you need. That's what my talk
is going to be about. Three years back when
I went to the fund. These 160 member countries or so basically said, this is not satisfying. That you tell us that
flexible exchange rates does the job in response
to volatile capital flows. We want to dig in,
we need to do more. The reason we need
to understand better is because in practice, countries do many other things. If you look at most
of our members, in addition to using the
monetary policy rate, they use FX intervention, they use capital controls, they use domestic
macro-prudential policies, they use all of these. But what was tough as the IMF to be able to
have a conversation, discuss these exact
policies with them, was that there was no framework. There is no welfare
maximizing framework, the ones that we
would like to use, which integrates these multiple tools
and multiple frictions. These were tough conversations because we're doing
x because we have y, we're using these
two instruments. It was not clearly what is the friction
you're addressing? What's the externality?
What the problem is. Three years ago we
basically at the IMF, hey, we need to do this. We need to do the research
because it's actually, there's nothing like I can turn to aside of papers and say, well, hey, we've done this. We know what the answer
is to using these tools. There was a hole in that space in terms of
what we needed to build to understand how to advise countries on using these tools and if and when
they should do it. There are many papers that got done over the
last three years. I'm only flagging the two
in which I was involved, which is what I'm going to base the rest of my presentation on. But there has been much other
work and this is joint work with my coauthors at the IMF; Suman Basu, Emine Boz, Filiz Unsal, Francisco Roch. If you want to look at
the papers underlying it, those would be the two
papers to go and look at. That's what we did. Again, three years
ago we started out on this and we said, we need my predecessor, who was first deputy managing
director, David Lipton, gave it the name integrated policy framework and that stuck. That's what it's called,
even though sometimes people don't understand what that means when you say that, but that's the language,
that's the terminology. The way we started it is the
way we would do this in, if we were thinking of
solving this problem, which we would start by saying, what are the frictions
and the externalities? Then of course, we put together
a model to understand it. Then I'm going to
apply that model in a specific context here, which is about managing the
global financial cycle now and what would optimal
policy responses be. We have a good deep literature that looks at all the kinds of frictions you can encounter in the open economy context. The first friction, of course, is one of price stickiness. This was what underpinned the classic
Mundell-Fleming model. That was the main friction, which basically
had that firms set prices in advance and
those prices did not respond immediately to any new shocks and
because of that, you could get
fluctuations in output. Of course, in the
open economy context, it's not enough to say
that prices are sticky. You have to also
say which currency the price is sticking in. There was a whole body
of work that looked at different possible forms
of price stickiness. I pushed the dominant
currency pricing framework, where prices are set mainly in a couple of currencies and the dollar
is dominant in there. That's been a well-known fact. It's not unknown that
the dollar plays a huge role in global trade. But in the last
decade, 10 years, the research has basically show that that actually
means something. It's not just that the
price is quoted in dollars, but everything that that implies in terms of the real effects
on imports and exports, on farm profitability, and so on is what you see. There's been a big body of work that shows that's the case. Anyway, once you have
price stickiness, then you have the
first externality, one externality, which is the aggregate
demand externality. I gave this to Emmanuel
and Yvonne for making this super clear and making front and center in their
beautiful econometrical paper. But it's to base it the
aggregate demand externalities, that is just the fact
that consumers don't internalize the effects of their decisions on
aggregate demand. This can be a problem
if prices are off, so if prices are too high and you are consuming
too little, you're not internalizing
the fact then that that can generate lower output
and higher unemployment. That's the aggregate
demand externality. Now, in the open
economy context is also something called the terms
of trade externality, which is basically the fact that when firms have pricing power
in international markets, they take into account
the fact that they have pricing power
and that their own demand curve's downward sloping. But they don't take into
account the fact that the whole country's demand curve is also downward sloping. Because of that, this
gives an incentive for the plan and we actually want to manipulate the terms of trade. Gali-Monacelli is one
presentation of this. But this is pretty much, this is they're all over
the literature once you're doing any kind of
price stickiness, these terms of trade
externality shows up. One of the things
that we do when we're working on these models, you're working at the IMF, is you're also talking to
the authorities about what they think as being
meaningful frictions. The terms of trade externality is something they
just don't get. Because the terms of trade externality in
this context would say that your country is
actually exporting too much. You want to actually reduce
exports so that you can move the relative price
of your goods in international markets
up and therefore, that will be a positive
terms of trade effect. They just don't get it. That's not something
they care about. You will see that when
we build a model, we mute that particular
channel because we don't want a policy
prescription that's based on a terms of trade externality. The next friction,
what they worry about, is the fact what we
call shallow markets, which is that there's imperfect substitutability
of assets. By the way, this is a
parallel literature that came up at the same
time that Mundell and Fleming were focused
on price stickiness. There was Kouri, who was focused not
on the goods market, but on the asset market
and about this fact of imperfect substitutability
across different assets. Specifically, imperfect substitutability
between local currency bonds and foreign currency bonds. That for some reason was less explored literature
for awhile and while yes, there was work done on it, but Gabaix and Maggiori credit for resuscitating
that line of work. Then there are more
papers that have come up. What kind of an externality
does that generate? It's something what we call the financial terms of
trade externality, which is basically that
because these two assets, suppose this is Mexico
and Mexico's issuing peso bonds and you have financial
intermediaries who are then lending to you. They charge you a
premium because of the currency risk for
holding those peso bonds. Now, as an individual in Mexico, you're not internalizing
the effect of your issuance on that premium. But for the country as a whole, every time you're
issuing new peso bonds, you are affecting that
premium and so for the country as a whole,
that obviously matters. That's an externality again, that comes in which a
planner would care about. They would care about why? Because It's not
always a problem. It's a problem when these
financial intermediaries are international
because that's lost resources from your country to the international
financial intermediary. If all it was was that
it was going from one domestic agent to
another domestic agent, the planner wouldn't
care about it. But in this case they
do if it is held, if it goes out externally. The other externality are external debt limits
and sudden stops, which is what I was showing you on the slide
before, which is again, the fact that when you borrow, you are subject to a borrowing constraint and the amount that you can borrow
is tied to a collateral, and the value of that
collateral can move around when your exchange rate moves
around, and therefore, again, as a household, when you're making a
decision about how much to consume you're not concerned about the effect on the nominal
exchange rate and so on. Again, that's an externality that matters for the country, but you just don't
individually internalize that. In the literature, which would be the
standard way to do it, in the academic literature, would be to analyze
one friction, one externality at a time. Well, most of the papers basically look at one of
these frictions at a time. There are exceptions
and those are some of the papers which look at a couple of those which is sticky prices and
external debt limits, but so the challenge
here when we set up to do this work
was to say how can we build an analytical
framework to actually incorporate these different
externalities that the policy world
that we care about? What would that give us
in terms of predictions, including for now,
which is in terms of managing the turn of the
global financial cycle? Let me just walk you through
the model very quickly. The setup that we have in
the two papers that I listed before is richer than what
I'm going to show you. This is a bit of a
streamlined version. I'm not going to have any role for
macroprudential policies. The paper has the housing
sector and so on, which gives rise to it. I'm going to show you a
much more streamlined model just to give you a
flavor of how we played with it and what
the takeaways would be. In terms of the sectors,
we have households, we have firms that produce and sell goods
that are tradable, we have domestic banks, and we have international
financial intermediaries. The policy tools
have policy rate, related exchange rate, capital controls,
and FX intervention. We set it up as a
three-period model because we wanted to look at both
ex-ante and ex-post policies. Policies that you would put
in place before the shock is realized and policies
that you would put in place once the
shock is realized. That gives us three periods. All of the action is in
Period 1 because that's when the shock is realized, and Period 0 and Period 2
are just a single state. The interesting part
of the model is the financial flows diagram, is the financial markets.
Here's what we have. We have domestic banks in
this emerging market that is borrowing from international
financial intermediaries and lending to households. They borrow in domestic currency and they lend to the households. There are limits to how
much they can do this, which is that it's tied to
a collateral constraint, which is that the amount of
debt that they can issue has to be bounded above by
a value of a collateral. Importantly, the value of the collateral is sticky
in the domestic currency. If I rewrote this in terms of foreign currency terms by just deflating with
exchange rate, you can see that the
right-hand side, and again depending
upon what it does, but the right-hand
side will fall, which means the amount
that you can borrow in foreign currency will decline whenever the exchange
rate depreciates. Now what about the
financial intermediaries? The financial
intermediaries who are lending to the domestic banks in domestic currency are funding themselves in world
capital markets. They borrow at i star from the world capital markets
and they lend it, i_t, to these domestic banks, but they subject to
a capital control, a capital tax on their earnings, so that's 1 minus [inaudible] t, and this is just taking into account the exchange
rate movement. Under uncovered interest parity, if you had uncovered
interest parity, this term in expectation
would be zero, which is either an expectation, what you return you make on your domestic currency lending is exactly equal to the
cost of your borrowing. But we have this shallow
market phenomenon. We allow for the shallow
market phenomenon, and that's because of the
imperfect substitutability of domestic currency bonds
and foreign currency bonds. That is given by
this term over here, which by the way is a framework of [inaudible]
and [inaudible], which is basically that this
excess return is equal to Gamma times the amount of domestic currency bonds those intermediaries
have to hold. This is Gamma times.
It's not a function, it's just a parameter Gamma
times what's in brackets. Now, there's another financial intermediary
that comes in there, which is the S_t, which are
basically noise traders. The noise traders
are irrational. They come in out of the market, and they are the
ones that generate taper tantrums in our world. What FX intervention can do is basically undo
those taper tantrums. Now we have to be
careful because if we're saying that the central
bank can come in and get rid of this
friction in the market, there has to be limits
to how much you can do this because we
really don't believe that the central bank is
going to intermediate all of the private
sector's transactions. We only allow this FX
intervention to work when it's dealing with these noise traders, people
who are coming here. There are limits to how
much they can do it. Then we have a cool trick, which is that we want
to make this model have the domestic currency
bonds and have the foreign currency
bonds and have the mismatch in there. We have that a
fraction Lambda of these financial intermediaries
are owned by households. What does it mean? If that Lambda goes to one, which means all of these
intermediaries are owned by the domestic
households, then effectively, all of the debt of
this country is foreign currency debt because
what you're doing is that the household is borrowing
in local currency terms, but you own these firms that are basically borrowing internationally
in foreign currency. As Lambda goes to zero, you have no currency
mismatch and you basically are then borrowing highly in your own currency so you don't have the currency
mismatch problem. Then the rest of it is pretty standard
on the household side. The consumption of imported
goods and home goods. On the pricing side,
not surprisingly, we have dominant currency
pricing for exports and other export prices are
sticky [inaudible], IPS. With this, there are
the following wedges. The first is the
aggregate demand wedge, which is what I said earlier. What this basically
is the gap between the margin rate of substitution between consumption and leisure, and the margin rate
of transformation, which comes from the
production function for the traded good. This, again, comes
from the Yvonne and Emmanuel's very nice work. There's that. You can end up in a situation where because
prices are too high, you end up with this
wedge being positive, which means the
economy as a whole is producing too little. The pecuniary externalities
which you bought through the sun stops also feed
into this wedge, the aggregate demand wedge. You also have the uncovered
interest parity wedge, which is the gap in terms of the excess
return that you are paying on domestic
currency bonds. This is the utility
loss from it. That's the margin utility loss from that additional
return that you're paying. Like I said, it is a problem only to the
extent that you have some of this that's
owned by foreign agents. You have actually resources that are being sent
out of the economy. If it wasn't the case,
this will not be. If Lambda is equal to 1, then this is not a wedge that the planner needs
to worry about. We ignore the terms of trade manipulation model for the reasons that I talked about previously and we can
do that by basically the planner ignores
the impact of its policies on the
export price of the good. Without showing you that slide, we're basically solving for
the Ramsey plan of problem. But now let's get into the
question I started out with, which is managing
the financial cycle. I'm going to put this
into boxes that can help to see where results lead us. You have a country that can have deep FX markets and whose dead can be far from the debt
limit. Think of Canada. Canada is a country with
deeper fixed markets. It's debt is far
from the debt limit. It's not a problem. But then you're going
to have countries debt may be low and far
from the debt limit, but has shallow FX markets, which is their currencies, bonds are thinly traded. Then of course you
can have countries whose debt is near
the debt limits. Let's just look at some cases. This is the simplest case, which is what happens if you're in this box
and your country, or Canada, and you're in the tightening of the
global financial cycle? For you, you're facing this, the interest rates are
going up where you have deep FX markets and
you're far from dead limit. The FX price would be that
you would reduce imports, you would reduce your
debt but otherwise your consumption
of home goods will not change and level of
exports would not change. Now you can mimic that exact policy if
you have sticky prices, you can get the same outcome by letting your
currency depreciate. Currency depreciation gives
you the exact same effect. You get your inputs to decline, your reducer foreign debt. You are at full
employment in the setup. This is the box I would say is the textbook
box that we have, which if you have deep FX markets and you're
far from the debt limit, then you can let the
exchange rate do its job. You can use the policy
rate and you can just exchange rate and
then you're good. We have a policy rate and
exchange rate depreciation. Basically, in this case, my three Pyrrhic is literally
keep the exchange rate. You move the exchange rate and policy rate doesn't change. Now let's look at a country
that has shallow FX markets. It's far from its debt limit
but has shallow FX markets. Now, a lot of countries like [inaudible] Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, they constantly worry about the situation that they
have shallow FX markets. Then what happens in this case is you actually end up with, in my example that one of the cases that we show
you for starkness, which you can see is that let's look at a shop which is what we call this the
foreign appetite shock, which is S, these are
the noise traders. This is like a taper
tantrum shock, which some of those
noise traders who are coming in and buying your domestic currency bonds decided they don't want to
do that and they go up. That's a problem for you. This is a completely
annoyed shock. It's not a fundamental shock. In this particular case, the result that we would
arrive at is you actually want to keep your exchange rate and your policy rate unchanged, but rely only on capital
flow measures and FX intervention to undo it. Why is that? This is what
I mean by an S shock. The external premium that you're paying in this
country when you have shallow FX market is increasing in your
amount of external debt. An S shock basically
moves this curve around. At every level of debt, you're either paying
a higher rate, you're paying a
lower rate depending upon how these noise
traders come in and out. In this particular case, when you have shallow markets and stark case where you have this symmetric
kinds of shocks, then Cadbury controls
and FX intervention does the job for you and you should not rely
on any other tool. How does that work? There are two things as a
policymaker that you can do. Well, you can do many things, which is, if you look
at the right-hand side, this is the excess
return that you are giving your financial
intermediaries. When S goes down, that means that the guys with the balance sheet
frictions need to hold more of domestic currency debt and they demanding a higher
premium for holding it. You can meet that by you
could raise the policy rate, you could raise interest rates, or you could give them
a subsidy on the, this is the capital
control subsidy. You could give them
a capital controls. Because I'm starting with
zero capital controls. In this case, this translates into capital controls subsidy. The benefit of using the
capital cost subsidy as opposed to using the
interest rate is at this, when you use the
interest rate you're affecting borrowing
decisions at home, all the consumption
decisions at home, and you end up with
excess deleveraging. By using the capital
control subsidy. You can therefore separate
the policy rate that domestic agents face
from what you have to give to the financial
intermediaries. Nothing you could do is you
could do FX intervention, which is basically what
you do is you would sell FX and you would buy the
domestic currency bonds. You would take the opposite
side of these noise traders, which is what several of
these central banks do. Then the question is, why do I need to use both
these instruments? I've told you why I don't
want to use a policy rate because it's going to
affect other margins. The question is,
why do I need to use both FX intervention and the capital control? The main reason is that each instrument is
costly in the setup. When you use a capital
control subsidy, you're losing foreign
exchange to the foreigners. Then when you do foreign
exchange intervention, you're foregoing carry profits. You use the two together
and when you do that, then you completely get rid
of the effect of the shock. Another way of saying this
is that in response to non-fundamental shocks that are hitting you, hitting
our economy, you actually don't want
to use your policy rate in your exchange
rate but instead these other instruments
are much more targeted and get you the
insulation that you need. I see we are on time. I've another 10 minutes,
that's the time? Then I move on to the case where I look at more what
looks like a sudden stop, which is the case when
Kappa H goes down, which means that the value of your pleageable collateral is
now viewed as being lower. The markets just
think that you don't have as much collateral as they thought you did
have in the past so they heightened the
borrowing constraints. If you're near the debt limit, it does depend upon
whether you have deep FX markets or
shallow FX markets. Because if you have
shallow FX markets in addition to the
sudden stopped piece, of course there's the
other piece which is the premier that you're
paying on your bonds. I'm just going to make a couple of results on this
and just move on. This is what basically the
sudden stops shock looks like. It's basically moving the
your debt limit to the left. What happens here in the sudden stops shocks case
is, what do you want to do? You have foreign
financial intermediaries who now think that your
collateral is of less worth and that leads
to a tightening of your ability to borrow,
which reduces consumption. In this case, what you
want to do is you want to depreciate your currency because by depreciating your currency, you're going to tilt demand, at least towards your goods for the same level
of consumption. The problem with doing
that is of course, that if you have foreign
currency borrowing, then that depreciation
of your currency is then going to tighten the
constraint even more. But if on the other hand, you have your debt is
in local currency, then that negative
effect is not there, at least by the amount of
local currency that you have. But in the setup, what you end up having is
because of the fact that these sudden stops
expose lead to big drop in consumption and therefore
through that an effect on the amount of output
that you produce. Exotic what you want to use is you want to use
a capital control. Again, in one of Yvonne
and Emmanuel's papers, they have the case when all of the debt is in foreign currency, that you would use an
exotic capital control. But of course, if it is in
local currency terms then you will use less of that
exotic capital control. This one last thing which
is a question that many of these policy makers grappled with in the emerging markets, which is how much to regulate the amount of borrowing
in different currencies. They are very concerned
about mismatch. They're very concerned
about their banks having exposure to foreign
currency borrowing. In many cases, they actually restricted and they
say you mismatch if you're borrowing in
a currency in which your earnings are in. If you look at what
happens if you actually do that and you move a country which is at a point where it has
shallow affects markets, then if you say the words and you move only towards
local currency borrowing, so the domestic banks get out of this intermediation
business intermeding between foreign currency
and domestic currency. On the plus side, you get better hedging. That's for sure. Because if you're moving more
toward local currency debt, you use your exchange rate to depreciate exchange
rate in bad times. That reduces also the
value of your debt that is hold externally so that
moves in the right direction. But on the other hand, because you're shrinking
the intermediation that can be done for your currency
bonds in markets, you end up with having to
pay a higher premium on whatever amount of local currency borrowing
that you're doing. Again, optimal effects,
mismatched regulation depends on a fixed market depth and when
you have deep FX markets, then of course you can ban FX mismatches entirely
but when you have shallow FX markets
you may regulate but not want to ban
these FX mismatches. Coming to the conclusion, again back to my question of our interest rate and
flexible exchange rates enough to manage a turn in
the global financial cycle? Again, the textbook is yes, I will just add a line to it, which it said when markets are deep and you're away
from the debt limit, then yes, that will be right. But more generally no, in other cases and in fact, in some cases, like I showed
you for the S shocks, their instruments may
actually dominate. Now, to be clear,
we are the IMF, so we are very nervous
about telling countries to use capital for
our measures and ethics intervention and so on. Yes, this is theory,
it tells you, gives you insights
about what can happen and what instruments
you may want to use but a big part
of the work over the last three
years has also been about how to use
handle with care, which is to be in the model, the instruments work well, there's no evasion, people
behave as you model them. There is no concern that they will be
misuse of instruments. This is a fantastic
Ramsey planner who's making these decisions. But obviously for the members, these are all the
concerns that they have, which is that if you say
that this tool is good, you can use it, then
you might have people misusing it all over the place
for all the wrong reasons. Some instruments are
worse than others. The big part of the work
over these last couple of years was basically a whole
lot of empirical work. These are not very well
identified specifications, but at the same time as
best possible to figure out how these instruments
play out in the data whether they actually provide you with the insulation, whether they actually
help you more macro stability
perspective and so on. Some instruments that work and some instruments
that don't work. Also the constant refrain, which is that you
don't want to use these instruments if you have in lieu of needed changes
to your macro policies. If the problem is that
you're spending too much and your fiscal deficit is too big then these measures are not
what you should be using, you should be
addressing the physical problem in your country. After doing all of that, just in terms of my last slide
on the operationalization. We did this, I think
was it February? February we had a
board decision. We have something called the IMF institutional view
on capital flows, which is what the IMF says, are acceptable policies on what countries can use
to manage capital flows. This IPF work basically lead to one big change in the
IMF's institutional view, which was basically that for
financial stability reasons, capital controls
on inflows may be appropriate to reduce unhedged
external debt stocks. Basically you can use preemptive capital
flow measures when a country's debt is high and especially if it's high
in foreign currency, because in that
world you are more likely to end up with
financial stability problems. This was an important marker for the IMF's institutional view
and capital flow management and right now we are in the operationalizing
of this work, the integrated policy frame, multiple countries'
surveillance. Of course, there's a lot
more work that's done, there's work on
quantifying the framework, building data set of metrics that capture
these frictions. There's always going
to be judgment which is integrating considerations
beyond the model's effect, level of institutional
development of the country. For instance, if you're
a low-income country and you don't have
strong institutions, then you really want to
communicate only one policy in one instrument because
otherwise you're going to have a huge problem
managing outcomes, so getting it all of those. But anyway, I'm going
to end with this, but it's been fun
working on this because this cover the
whole spectrum from a big policy question that many central bank governors
and treasuries and so on, were thinking about to creating the work
that was needed to help these countries
getting a change at the board and now they
operationalized this. As FDMD, I get to say that the operationalizations
statement deal with countries on this.
All right. Thank you. 