Alan Moreira: We're going
to do something really simple in this paper. We're going to construct
this volatility managed portfolios. These portfolios, we're
going to just get these well-known aggregate
asset pricing factors and scale them by a
measure of volatility. That's all. These
portfolios are going to take more risk when volatility is low, and take less risk when
volatility is high. The motivation is
straight out of the most simple portfolio
choice problem that you can write, that is, if you can basically predict
the risk return trade off, then you should invest more on these aggregate portfolio when this risk return
trade-off is more attractive. As it's well-known, there's a very weak
relationship between expected return and volatility
in the time series. It's almost like the most has to be that volatility
timing is beneficial. We're just going to
apply these ideas to the data, and turn out
to be very much true. You can enhance
the Sharpe ratios relative to a
buy-and-hold portfolio. In particularly, we're
going to generate large Alphas relative to
the original factors. What's puzzling is
that you're typically is going to take less risk in peers
that are scary. That is, you're going
to have high Alpha by taking less risk
when recessions, when volatility is high, you're going to sell off
their market crashes, when typically you think
premiums are very high and it's probably a bad
idea to be selling our strategy is going
to do exactly that. Do exactly this
dumb thing that you saw your family doing or
some endowments doing, but nevertheless, there's this portfolio going to do well. The key is that it comes back in once volatility comes
back to normal. What I'm going to
do is basically, spend most of the talk is
volatility managed portfolios, and talk about what they
are, how they work. Then I'm going to think about the portfolio trust
implications of this, both for short-term
mean-variance investors, as for long horizon investors. Then we're going to very briefly think about what's
the implication of general equilibrium
because obviously not everybody can
volatility at time, but probably I'm not going
to spend much time here. There's no data collection, effort involved
in this exercise. The most standard data
that you can imagine off, and you can download or basically ask this
data to anybody, and the key constraints
that we need daily data to construct our
measures of volatility. All the numbers that I'm
going to have port is going to be annualized numbers. What do we do? That's
basically the paper. We go get your favorite
asset pricing factor. You could even think as a combination of asset pricing
factors that you think, scan the mean-variance
from here. Then we're going to
construct this measure of previous month
realized volatility. This they think that measured at time t.
We just go there, there's no parameter
estimation involved. You just go construct the
model using past daily data, you construct a matter
of realized volatility. Then you're going to be
construct this volatility managed factor out of
the original factor. The only thing here is
that we use this C here to basically normalize the volatility of
these two portfolio. That's just for interpretation. That they saw that
the volatility of this portfolio
equal to that one. But that doesn't have any
effect on Sharpe ratios is just so that the
Alphas are interpretable. Then what we're going to do
is this standard regression. Then we're going to be
looking at these Alphas here. That is, how much a higher
Sharpe ratio can we get by engaging this
timing strategy? I'm going to discuss later
what's the economics of that, how exactly we are
getting this Alpha. Here's our basically
our main table. Here's the volatility
managed factors. Here we are going to
be doing individually. Later, we are going to go to
the multi-factor approach. Then what you see,
you always have a lower Beta, that is, you're always reducing exports relative to the original factor. You always mostly
have high Alphas besides the SMB that
has a negative Alpha. But you know that SMB
doesn't have a positive expected returning
the sample anyway. It's not clear what
to make of that. But you see, for
example for the market, you have something
like the market during this period that had
an excess return of about eight percent, a little bit less than that, and you have an Alpha
of almost five percent. It's like is a relatively
speak is a huge off, especially because is basically
an aggregate portfolio. That's relatively easy trade, not for the Norway's sovereign
wealth fund, obviously. But that holds true for
all the other factors, for some of them
this is a gigantic, from momentum, you have
this gigantic Alphas. By the way, this fact here
has shown up in other papers, for example Toby and Ken have a paper that show something closely
related to this fact here. But that's also
holds true also for carry trade and
across the border, these asset pricing factors. What's the economic
meaning of this? Well, you can start
thinking about, just from the perspective
of a new video portfolio, how much we can and basically
increase the Sharpe ratio. It's basically, the Alpha
divided by the residual risk. This is a fairly big numbers
for the markets like 0.33 relative to our Sharpe
ratio of 0.42 in the sample. For momentum it's really big, but it's very large
appraisal ratios. But you might think, well, we live in a multi-factor world. We know that the
CAPM does not work. While some investors can
only invest in the market, other investors have
access to other factors. What's the right
thing to do there? How to think about these facts? Then what we do, we apply exactly this idea to like this static
MVE portfolio. Now think about the buy and hold investor that choose
his portfolio up. He's going to choose
this MVE portfolio obviously here we're
going to be doing in-sample MVE portfolio, so you have to take the
buy-and-hold Sharpe ratios with a huge grain of salt. But then what we're
going to apply, we're going to do
volatility managing on this MVE portfolios. That there's not going to be any issues involved because
I'm just going to do this bread and butter
trading strategy that takes more risk
when volatility is low. Then what we do, we go and slowly expand the
investment opportunity set, or if you're an
asset's pricer you might not believe that momentum is really
there and you might think that it should stop
at Fama-French tree. Depends on what your vision
of the right factor model, what's the right proxy for the mean variance
frontier in the economy, you might going to
be thinking about these different columns here. But then what you'll see
is like across the board, you always get
very large Alphas, and very large appraisal ratios. The right way is a Sharpe ratio of the regional
buy-and-hold portfolio, and the appraisal ratio is basically the extra bit that the volatility management
strategies produce. Obviously this is
economically important, not only from an
individual perspective, but also from asset
pricing because these factors have a lot of information about a large
cross-section of assets. What is this telling you, is that a strategy that takes more risk when
volatility is low, make large Alphas, what is going to say something about compensation for
risk in the economy. Let me just like
open up a little bit what's going on very
mechanically here. We can always decompose
the Alpha in two bits. This first bit here is
due to volatility timing. That is to the extent that
you can basically shift your average Beta relative to the unconditional
Beta that's going to be picked up by this star. These other pieces, like if you know the work
of Jagannathan wag, that's going to be
measuring market tie. If the risk return trade-off
is strong, that is, expected returns line
up with variance, then the Alpha is going
to be basically zero because these things are
going to offset each other. That is, you might
volatility time well, but expected returns are just like getting back all the
gains that you'll have. These things are going
to cancel out and you're going to get
the Alpha of 0. But if vol does not forecast returns as basically
true in the data, then you're going to get
all these pieces Alpha. Note here that even if vol
predicts returns somewhat, you can still get
a positive Alpha. This previous literature
was focused on the fact, here's the risk return trade-off
is there or not there, but that's not the
relevant question to ask. The relevant question to ask, is that strong enough? As long as it's
not strong enough, you can benefit of
volatility timing because the risk
return trade-off is moving in an attractive
way when vol is low. You can see that very clearly, for example, for the
market portfolio. Here's a nonparametric
version of this strategy, or a Fama-French style
of showing stuff. You basically what we do here, we sort months by their
realized volatility, and bucket them in five bins according to the level
of the month volatility. Then we look next month, what happens with returns, and what happens
with volatility. You see the relationship is
basically flat on returns, that's probably not surprising. That it doesn't
predict well returns. The previous month volatility predicts next month
volatility well. But for an investor, and people have
focused on this thing, it goes up here, here's flat, there's no risk return, but this is hard to estimate
and so on, so forth. But for our investors deciding how much to
invest in the portfolio, he actually cares about the
effect of risk aversion, that is expected returns
divided by a variance. That's sharply negative. This is a strong signal
that you should be taking more risk
when vol is low, and less risk when vol is high. It's also true for
the Sharpe ratio. But people often focus
on the Sharpe ratio, but that's not really the
right quantity if we're deciding how much to allocate
between the two assets, in this case is really the
risk return trade-off, and that's very
sharply negative. That's what the paper is. We look at these results
of several angles. I'm going to just discuss
two of them here, but we show that in fact this takes much less
risking recessions, it's going to survive
transaction costs. This works with
embedded leverage, so you can use a call options to implement this type
of strategy if you don't have access to
internal leverage. We will look at
different sub-samples and see what happens. It's somewhat weaker
in this middle period. The results can be
further improved if you are willing to estimate
the mode for volatility. We are not estimating any model. There's nothing to
discuss in terms of overfitting or anything because there is no parameter
being estimated. But you can estimate parameters, and do
stuff even better, but then would have to
defend myself here. We look at internationally
and staff works as well. We look across multiple
factor controls, and there is well known
in the literature, there's this low-risk anomaly
in the cross-section. One might think that
this low-risk anomaly in the time series that we are exploring is similar to
the cross-sectional one, but they turn out least by
standard regression test, they don't seem to be
capturing the same thing. By the way, you can actually
have volatility time, even these cross-section
anomalies. It works there as well. You might be worried
because we're doing dynamic strategies we might be generating put like returns
or option-like returns, but we're showing the paper that our search can very well
behave returns and we go through a battery of
tests to show that. It doesn't seem
that this thing is trading like a put option cell. In fact, after a bad month, the strategy is going
to take the last risk. It's the opposite
of a put option. We will show that our result
is exactly less exposed to variance risks that
you might think that because we're
trading volatility. It might be an issue, but
because when vol is high, our strategy actually
takes less vol risk than their buy-and-hold
portfolio. Let me show just the
recession results and the transaction
costs results. What you see here, here I'm
[inaudible] the beta vary by if the economy is in
the recession period. You'll see that on
average our strategy has a beta of 0.8. But if you condition
on a recession, this beta falls to 0.3. You're taking a much less
risk during scary times, at least as judged
by how we think about how asset prices think about
compensation for risk, what it makes this puzzling. Our strategy does trade quite a bit because we are trading
on realized volatilities. Realized volatilities
moves a lot. Here's the absolute
value of the trading. That means that on
average we're churning 70 percent of your portfolio every month. It's
a lot of churn. What we do here,
we calibrate using a QR white paper where they use their data to estimate
transaction costs. Our strategy basically
appears there, the upper bound of
what they think is plausible in a high fixed month. Nevertheless, our
strategy survives, but you can further improve,
just by for example, if you use a model of
expected volatility, you can reduce this
churn substantially. Cut by half, or you can even just trade when the stuff is
above the mean. If you're actually
a practitioner, you can basically play with this to reduce substantially your exposure
transaction costs. You might be thinking,
well, what's going on? We know that in recessions our expected returns are high, there's a large literature
on that, what's going on? To get a little bit of
sense of the dynamics of what's happening in the data, we're going to do a
vector autoregression in order to see how volatility and expected returns interact. What I want to point you at, here we look at this
middle picture here. This is basically
a construction, that's like how
volatility to respond to a volatility shock. Once the standard deviation
volatility shocks goes up and then goes
down by 18 months, is basically went away. Expected returns
on the other hand, initially do not respond, and then it slowly respond
and stay high for a while. That shouldn't be surprising. We know the expected
return shocks are very, very persistent. But what this is
telling you is that basically you can cash out when there is a volatility
shock and come back in, and expect returns
is still be very high. There's a mismatch between risk and compensation for
risk in the time series. Why is that? Maybe some
people are slow-moving. We don't have an
answer for that. I have four minutes probably. First I'm going to talk
about what does it mean in terms of like utilities benefit for mean-variance investor. Basically, just using
the appraisal ratio, that mean-variance
investor can basically increase his certainty
equivalent by 65 percent. That is, if he had a
10 percent return, he can increase, it is returned to 16.5
percent basically from that. Just to have a sense
of magnitudes, the expected return timing
regression that use exactly numbers based on forecasting are squares
that have all the issues with over-fitting have
a 35 percent again. It's almost twice that. It's large. This works for manufacturers beyond
the aggregate market. While if you're going to do
the expected return time, you have to use
different predicts for different factors. I loved its back return
time and literature. I'm just giving a
contrasting point. But you might think that, well, what should a long horizon
investor should do? Should he really
time volatility? For example, Buffett
and Cochrane had up ads during the fall
of 2008 saying no, that that's a bad idea. The investor should ignore short-term volatility
in stock markets. Then that might be all we're doing here is really stupid
for a long-run investor. We're going to be thinking how portfolio theory
thinks about that, it thinks in terms
of hedging demands. That is a long-term
guy is going to have some hedging demand
to the extent that shocks are [inaudible]. What we're going to think, and here's the intuition
if you live till here and you have a
shock that does that, if vol goes up, you
couldn't care less. If you trade on this, you're just going to be actually making your way
off more volatile. You probably don't
want to do that. Empirically, these shocks
are very, very slow. The private practice generations
are highly persistent. Sharpe ratio is increased very, very slowly with horizon and there's tons of
cash flow shocks. In the end, is a
quantitative question. Is it true that they
should do or shouldn't do? We can't say just apriori. What we do is set up
this portfolio problem that's fairly
standard up to 0.4. We are going to allow
volatility to move around, expect returns to move around, but what's going to be
important to capture, Cochrane and Buffett's
intuition is that we're going to
have to allow the composition of a
discount rate shocks and cash flow shocks to vary. That's something
that hasn't been in the literature, and
turned out to be essential to at least make
their intuition work. Just the fact that returns
we have had are not sufficient to say that long-run investors
shouldn't trade on that. In fact, what we show here it's a simplified version
that the weight can be written as the myopic weights plus this higher
demand that depends on the ratio between the amount of discount rate volatility and the amount of total volatility. Here's intuitive if suddenly there's more discount
rate volatility going on, relatively speaking, the stocks are safer for a
long-run investor. Once you require to get their intuition is that this
thing is moving around. But we don't know in the data. That's just an empirical
question. We don't know. We know that expected
returns seem to move around, but we don't know if
the volatility of the expected returns move around relative to the
volatility of returns. That's an empirically
challenging thing. But then what we're going to do, we can approximate this by this very simple function
here that's basically an intercept and this
coefficient here that basically captures how much
volatility timing you'll do. If your mean-variance
or log your b equals 1. That's relatively the level that we're going to be
thinking about. If the Buffett Cochrane
conjecture holds, then b equals 0. What we do, we're going to
see what happens in the data. We calibrate these
two to the data for the market portfolio, and
then evaluate three cases. One is that when the
discount rate cash flow volatility mix is constant, that's basically the
standard assumption in the whole literature
because we can't measure it, so we assume it's constant. Then we're going
to basically think about what if there
is a higher share of cash flow vol when volatility goes up or higher share
of discount rate fall. Here's what we find, if it's in the standard case, then the long-term investors
should behave exactly as the mean-variance investor
because it's true on average, he holds a bigger position
on the risky asset, but it's going to respond
just the same to volatility. Then so in this case, the standard case
intuition, it doesn't hold. It should just trade exactly like the
mean-variance investor. If it's mostly about
cash-flow volatility, that is, in the 4,000 rates, we truly thought that the
eight percent rate was about the fate of
the US economy in the long run then the
long-run investors should actually trade more
aggressively on vol, while if you think
the fall of 2008 was about bankers risk
aversion shifting very quickly then they should
trade less aggressively. But nevertheless, even if you have a
fairly long horizon, I don't know the horizon of Norway's sovereign wealth fund, but even in this case, you still can benefit
of volatility time. Of course, in here summing
up this, of course, we don't have, not everybody
can volatility trade, so I'm going to skip that. The conclusion is, we show very large Alphas for this
very simple strategy. This has very big gains in
utility and as I did discuss, this pose a general
equilibrium puzzle in the sense that
the price of risk is low when volatility is high. 