Karen Glenn: First to
give you a little bit of background on what we do at the Social
Security Administration up so the chief actuary. Why do we care about
these demographic trends, in particular to fertility? Number 1, our objective
is really to assess the actuarial status of the trust funds as
required by law. What is the ability to pay
the benefits scheduled in law with the revenues
that are coming in? What is the shortfall, if any, over the long-range? When we talk about long-range, we're talking about 75
years in the future. This is an important point, our baseline is
always current law. We don't anticipate
any future changes in law or policy or decisions, so really think about
where we are right now. Just a big picture
about what we do. We have an actuarial model reflecting the
entire population, the US population,
and workforce, both the authorized and
unauthorized, and abroad. Earnings in the economy. We have to take those
into consideration. Those covered by
social security, those taxable by
social security. Then beyond that,
which workers end up becoming insured
for benefits, and how many actually start
receiving those benefits? Once people start
their benefits, what are their average
benefit levels and how long do they continue
receiving those benefits? Finally, the last piece
in our model is really accumulating the
reserves of the program. Looking at the income and the
oak go to fund every year just to figure out when
those funds will deplete. Demographic assumptions,
they are really critical in shaping the age
distribution for the future. Fertility, birth
rates are really the most critical factor
in that age distribution. Quickly, let me go through this. Where do we get our data? We have age-specific
central birth rates. That's births during the year
to mothers at a given age, divide it by the mid-year
female population at that age. We get the births from National Center for
Health Statistics. We get the resident population
from the Census Bureau. Putting that all together, we get total fertility rates. Those are really just the sum of the age-specific central
birth rates during the year. One really critical point is that is for a specific year. It's a period measure, not a cohort measure. This final bullet is a
little bit of a mouthful but the TFR can
be interpreted as the average number of children
that would be born to a woman if she were to experience at each
age of Earth life. The birth rate observed
in or assumed for a specified year and if she survived the entire
childbearing period. What do we assume? First, the purple lines here are the historical
data for the TFR. Couple of things
that jump out really quickly is back in the '50s, early '60s, the baby boom. TFRs were well over 3.5, dropped down significantly
in the '60s, down to the early
'70s below 2.0. Jumped up again in
the early '90s to about 2007 and then dropped again in the
reason recession. Since then zooming in a
little bit on the '70s, '80s, and '90s it's well
understood now that a lot of the decline and
then rise back up is due to women
delaying their births. As I mentioned, the TFR
is a period measure. If births are low in a year because younger women
are delaying births, that will depress the TFR. You will see it go down, then jump back up. But more recently
it's been going down and is that really
because of the recession? Other vectors, we're
going to talk a lot more about that and
the rest of the panel. This next slide really zooms
in a little bit more on the 1980 through 2017 period and more specifically what we're projecting for the future. In the projection period, you can see that middle line, we're going back up to
2.0 children per woman. We get there and about 10 years, which is very quickly from the very low levels right now. The other two lines
you will see in the projection
period are what we call our low-cost and
high-cost assumptions. If there are 2.2 children
per woman in the future, that's a really good thing
for social security, we'll have more workers
paying into the program. More tax is coming in. There will be more benefits down the road but that takes
a while to flow in. It just changes the age
distribution of the population. Similarly, our high-cost
assumption is 1.8 for the future that's as if births are lower than
they've been historically. That will be worse
for the program. Fewer births, fewer
people paying in. The question is, we always have to think 75
years in the future. What is the right level for
that TFR going forward? Again, this blue line on, so we are on Slide 6 at
this point for folks on the phone is the historical TFR. The orange line shows what our ultimate assumption was in that year's
trustees or board. For example, in 2019
our assumed ultimate, which generally is
years 11 through 75 of the projection
period was 2.0, whereas the actual TFR for that year was down around 1.74. Couple of things you'll
notice on this slide is that in 1988, we dropped our
ultimate rate from 2.0-1.9 just as fertility
rates were starting to go up. Again, let me say in about 2000, let's see, where are we? In the '90s, we started
bringing them up again. Those ultimate rates, as fertility rates
were going down. It's a tough thing to
do to figure out where the fertility rate
is going to become. We want to be incremental. When we think about making
changes to the ultimate rate, we don't want to assume that the most recent experiences where it's going to be forever. You will see that we've been at 2.0 for quite a while now. Slide 7 goes through central
birth rates by age groups. This is our projections in
the 2019 trustees report. A few things that jump out here. The green line is women 14-19. You can see those birth rates historically have been
going down quite a bit. That's really a good new story. Women 20-24, that's
the red line here. They have also been
going down quite a bit. Some of that we expect
as recession effects, some of it is women
delaying births more. You can see for
women in their '30s, birth rates there either leveled out or
continued to rise. It certainly seems
pretty clear from this graph that women are tending to have their
children later on. Even women in their '40s, while the numbers are small, you can see they are increasing. As I mentioned, the
typical way of looking at the total fertility rate
is on a period basis. This graph, this is Slide 8, instead looks at things
on a cohort basis. Looking at women,
how many children they have in their lifetime. The purple is all historical. The bluish in the middle is a mix of historical
and projected data. The further you are to the left, really the more historical
data is included there. Moving towards the right, that becomes more
of our projections. For example, you can
see women born in 1981, they're about 38 right now. Really most of their
childbearing is completed. Even right in the middle
of that blue section, most of that is
really good data. The thing to notice here
is that every cohort completed or mostly completed
so far is well above 2.0. One other thing we
like to look at is surveys that ask women, how many children do you expect to have in your lifetime? I know there's a lot
going on in this graph, so let me orient
you a little bit. We've got age groups
going across the bottom, starting 15-19,
going out to 40-44, and then there's a
total on the very end. The different colors
are various surveys, these are all the National
Survey of Family Growth. The orange is the
earliest one we've got, which was 1982 going out to
the most recent is purplish, grayish on the end is 2015-2017. One thing that jumps out is the orange line for ages 40-44. First time I saw I said, what is going on there? It's actually these women are really having
their children during the baby boom so they
were 40-44 in 1982. There were having a
lot of births back on. That's what that
is. The thing to note is that expectations
have fluctuated a bit. But generally,
there are over 2.0 and really in the
level of 2.2-2.3. Just one other way
to look at this, one natural question might be, have women's future expectations been changing over time? One thing I should have
mentioned on the last slide, let's go back there
for a second. You'll see these white lines in the middle of each
one of the bars. That's how many children
they've actually had so far, so that's actual data. The additional piece above
that is future expectations. What if we only look at
those future expectations? The stuff above
those white lines on the previous graph obviously
varies by age group. Women in their 40s don't expect to have many future children. But the thing to take from
this graph is that over time, expectations have been either increasing or staying level, they haven't really
been going down. The natural question then is, how do these expectations
compared to reality? Are they a good predictor
of actual fertility? We looked at a couple
of things here. This is comparing for women, 25-29, what the surveys say versus the actual
realized of births. The yellow line is similar to those
surveys we just looked at the NSFG surveys. The orange line
we've got here is an earlier survey from the CPS. They used to ask a
similar question and the blue line is actual
data and our projections. So what you can see
here is that women do tend to overestimate the number of children they will have, but it's relatively steady. It's Annabel 0.2
maybe a little bit more than the actual number
of children they will have. We did a couple of comparisons, you'll see the
numbers at the top. The 0.25 is the average
overestimate for women who have already reached age 49 so childbearing
is complete. The 0.22 incorporate some data for those women who
are in the middle of their childbearing years so brings in the actual
data for them. Then the 0.18 is just versus whatever
actual data there is, and also including
our projections. You can see that
each one of those is around the 0.2-0.3 area. Similar analysis
for age is 30-34, basically the exact same picture and the
average overestimates, or again, in the 0.2 range here. Bottom line on these is really expectations don't
do a great job of predicting the level, but they are consistently a
little bit higher over time so they are a good
predictor as long as you make that adjustment
for the difference. How am I doing on time? We're going to skip over
a couple of these slides. We don't actually do
our projections by marital status but if you want to look at
those slides later, we've got some age groups
by married only an unmarried and just
the percentage of females currently married. Well, slide 17. One other thing we
like to look at is fertility rates by
various countries. Lot of numbers on this slide, one very interesting
thing to notice is at the very bottom is
the United States. The rightmost column
is the difference in the total fertility
rate from 2006-2016. The most recent 10 years, the US has dropped by 0.3. That is more than
any other country on this list is a select
list other than India. Most other countries
are really in the 0.10 right
around their range. Why are we really dropping so much more than these
other countries? I think we will just go
over one more slide here. We looked at a bunch of
countries and what is the mean age of the mother
after her first birth? The black line at
the very bottom is the US bunch of other
comparable countries, mostly OECD are above. Where you can see is that the US mean age is well below
these other countries. If some of what's going on is really women's beginning
to delay their births. They've got a lot
of room to do that, you can see that based on what's going on in these
other countries. Very quickly, one thing we learned about from
our technical panel, we had Emilio Parrado from University of Pennsylvania
come speak to us. Is that women born in other countries who
immigrate to the US, tend to have very
high birth rates in a couple of years
after they immigrate. You can see on this
graph that women who have immigrated two
or three years ago, their birth rates are almost double the baseline
for other women. There is certainly
some connection between immigration
and birth rates, we've been exploring and we'd love to hear other's
thoughts on that as well. Won't show you this one, a lot of lines on here. I think that will do it for
now. Thank you, everybody. Martha J. Bailey: I'll
say, terrific everyone. It's exciting to
see so many people in the room for a
fertility talk. This doesn't happen
to me every day. Jim, thanks for organizing, and I should also thank the
other panelists who seeded some of their time so
I can talk longer. I think everyone
has a lot to say, and so I'm grateful
for that time. I'm going to back out, just zoom out just a little
bit from what Karen said, and where she led us. Actually, I'm going
to build on a lot of things she said and
believe it or not, we haven't coordinated
in advance, so it's nice that we are going to be on
agreement on so many things. This is a picture of the
US general fertility rate. That's the number of births divided by the number of women ages 15-44 over the
broad sweep of history. In case you can't see that axis, it starts in 1840, and it's going all the way up to the most recent numbers in 2018. The big thing that really will stand out on this
graph, there are a few. But the first is that
fertility rates for most of US history
have been falling. They fall through about
the beginning of the 1930s where they actually stabilize during the Depression,
interestingly. They increased quite dramatically
between 1940 and 1960. This is roughly a 20-year
or 50 percent increase in the general fertility room. What most people
think about is what I call the wartime wiggle. This is people deploying
and then returning, and this is what constitutes the baby boom, but
it's actually not. That's actually a pretty
minor part of the story. The baby booms are
really big deal. Then it ends very abruptly and fertility rates really hit very close to where
they are now, right around 60, where
they've hovered. From a historian's perspective, when you look at this part, I'm going to try to use my
little laser down here, that seems fairly minor in
the large sweep of things, and you can also see
those business cycles cycling around there too. Those also seem like
fairly minor fluctuations. The big picture here is that as the US economy is
developing dramatically, fertility rates are actually
falling and urbanizing. Now, in the 1940s, when we get to the baby boom, people will say why did
fertility rates go up? Urbanization and
rising affluence. Same explanation separated
by 10 years from the decline where people attributed the same thing
to the roaring '20s. Then after the fact, well, we're continuing to grow, more women are working, people really don't
know what to make of this recent period and
women's empowerment has continued to increase and we've seen fertility rates
really stabilized. One of the things I'll say to the Social Security
Administration and to the others
who work on this, it's really hard to know what's
going on with fertility, which is one of the
reasons I think it's excited me and motivated
my research for so long. The other thing I'll say is this is the total fertility rate, which is a synthetic measure, but it takes the general
fertility rate and adjusts by different numbers of women
in different age groups. The idea is to try to age-adjust
these fertility rates, and one of the things you
see is it lines up really, really closely to the
general fertility rate and fluctuates a bit more
depending on the period. Now, let's zoom in on that
total fertility rate, which is exactly
where Karen ended, and I want to talk a little
bit more about how this relates to completed
childbearing. What I've done is put
together some numbers from the census which asks women the number of
children they've ever had, excluding miscarriages
and stillbirths up until about 1990, and this is what
you see from that. Comparing the total
fertility rate here in the dashed line, that's what we've been talking
about and that's plotted on this axis in terms of time to mother's birth
cohort plus 25 years, and then looking at her completed childbearing
at the end of her reproductive years,
what you'll see, and that's plotted up
here on this top part, what you'll see is
that those lineup very closely in
terms of pattern. But you'll also notice, and this is part of the
points that Karen was making, is that you miss pretty
wildly in different periods, especially periods in flux. In particular, during
the baby boom, when women are speeding
up their childbearing, they're having a lot more
kids at younger ages, you see the TFR go up
really, really dramatically, and also when it
starts declining, you see it decline more rapidly than in fact,
completed childbearing did. Now, you can take the June CPS, and I've layered it on here, so you can see how well it
corresponds to the census because the census
stopped asking in 1990, how completed
childbearing is moving. For the most recent
cohort that turned 45, which is really where we
think most childbearing ends, that's my birth year, we had a little bit over two children
on average per woman. Now, the question is, as we've seen the total
fertility rate decline out here, how do we expect completed
childbearing to change? For the cohort of 1983, so they're turning 36 in 2019, their completed childbearing
is a little bit lower, and that's really
what I want to spend some time talking about. Will completed child bearing fall below two in
the near future, in the long term? To answer this question,
I want it back up again. There's going to be
a lot of gratuitous economic history
and this or maybe not because I think it's important to understand
where we started. When we're looking at
the long-term decline in childbearing, I want to talk about how we got there and then I
want to shift over and talk about how women are achieving completed
childbearing in the recent era. What I'm plotting here is the distribution of children born to women who are over age, 45, and this is for the
birth cohort of 1850, so women who were coming of age right after the Civil War. One of the fascinating
things when you stare at this is how are we
getting to this level? It's almost a uniform
distribution. This childlessness rates up here are really driven
by non-marriage, so women who are
remaining unmarried, and it just goes out between one and 12, it's almost flat. You have a good eight
percent chance of having almost any number
between one and 10. This tells you that there's
tremendous uncertainty. Even though those
averages are changing, you just couldn't be really sure how many of you are
going to end up with. What happens is we move forward that decline as we move
through to the Depression, is you see women more effectively limiting
their childbearing. This is cohort of
1870, cohort of 1890. The other thing
you'll see is that childlessness rates are really, really high over
a third of those women in part driven by non-marriage and in part driven by married women
having no children. The mass is really pushing back. Then we get to what we call
the low fertility cohorts. These are women who are born in the first decade of
the 20th century, coming of age right around the time of the
Great Depression. Now, you can see that
almost 75 percent of these women had two
or fewer children, and almost 2/3 of married women had two or fewer children. This is one of the
reason Gary Becker said when he's looking at
completed childbearing, "Look, women could get there. They could get to
these low numbers well before the age of contraceptive technology
and legal abortion, they did just fine." Thirty percent of these
women were also childless. Now, let's look
at the baby boom. One of the things you
see as you push out from those low fertility
cohorts is mass are shifting and every part
of the distribution out. Women are having more
and more children. Childlessness rates
plummet and women are having three children on average over their
reproductive lifetimes. But as the baby boom ends, and this is the first cohorts
where childbearing is starting to really decline, so they're coming of
age in the mid-1960s, they would have had access to modern contraceptive
technology for their entire
reproductive lifetimes and legal abortion
for about half of it. You see the cohorts of
1950 and 1960 loading on there and you'll
see that there's a very different trend emerging. In particular, there's
this peak at two. For these cohorts
of 1950 and 1960, we do see this increase
in childlessness relative to the cohort of 1940. Just to compare, for the
low fertility cohorts, the one that Becker says,
"Hey, they got there. They're just fine." Without all of these modern technologies, one of the things you see
is that they're average. Completed childbearing
was about 2.2, and that's only a little bit higher than the women of 1960. But what I want you to take away from this figure is that they got there in very,
very different ways. People were making
very extreme decisions to opt-out of
childbearing entirely, not being able to achieve the number you think
that they want. Now, coming back to our figures. What do we think? How
much has changed, say, for the cohort of 1960 moving
through the next 20 years? This is another graph
once I saw this, I just thought it
was so remarkable. We start with a
cohort of 1960-1964, and we move forward to
the cohort of 1965-1969. If you're staring and squinting, you might be able to
see a little bit of daylight between those
two distributions, but there's really not much. What about the
cohort of 1970-1974? For that group, you see
childlessness rates falling a bit, and you also may see
a little bit of mass, more mass in the fours
and fives, but not much. What about the cohort for
women born in the late 1970s? That one you really
can't even see, I'm going to toggle
back and forth. It's really right on
top of it, and in fact, you might see even
a little bit more mass out in the fours and fives, childlessness rates really low. These are the cohorts
that were mostly finished before the
Great Recession. What do we think about
the more recent cohorts, in particular, cohorts
born right around 1980, because they're the
most recent ones we can really start making
projections on. Women born in 1980, they did contribute too, and this is what we're
talking about in terms of the age-specific rates
Karen put up there. These are age-specific fertility
rates for 15-year-olds, there at the bottom,
20-24 year-olds, they're right here, and the 25-29 year-olds
are right up here, and these are taken from
the NCHS vital statistics. For women who were born in 1980, they were the ones right here in the early 2000s contributing to a decline in birth
rates for that group, and they were also the
ones contributing to the decline here in birth rates of 25-29 year-olds. How did childbearing
for this group turnout, say by their early 30s? Back to my picture I was showing you before
over the last cohort, is women born right up
through the end of the 1970s. Women born between 1980-'84
who were only 35 and over, looked remarkably like the
cohorts we've seen before. We do see about a
five-percentage point gap between their
childlessness rates which appear higher
than the women who just completed their
childbearing at age 45, and about a two-point
gap at number 2. The good news is there's lots
of time for them to make this up because they're quite young and the other thing is, we've seen these birth rates for women who are in their 30s. This is 30-34, this top line, and this is 35-39
rise dramatically. In fact, birth rates for 30-34 year-olds have
almost doubled in the past 20 years and rates for 35-39 year-olds
have more than doubled. Another picture that's
quite striking is if you look at birth rates for
women who are 40-44, that's this top line, it is almost tripled
in the last 30 years. The other thing I'll note, this is where historical
perspective is interesting. In case we think we've reached some biological constraint
on what's possible, it's in fact still lower, we could actually quadruple and still be a little bit
below baby boom levels. There's still some space to go presuming there hasn't been a massive biological
shift in what's possible, and you will also see here that rates of childbearing for 45-54 year olds and this is mostly for women
in their late 40s, could double and still be
right below baby boom levels. If you look at the June CPS, almost 20 percent of women in the cohorts that have
completed their childbearing, had a birth at their last
birth after age 35 and about 5-7 percent of the same
cohorts after age of 39. Bottom line, there's plenty of time for the cohorts of 1980s to makeup on the births that they differed if they choose to. Just in case you want to
see how these changes and distributions
have contributed to children born by age and cohort. What I'm plotting here
is the mean children born by birth cohort, that's birth year here, and these are averaged
in five-year bins, or I'd say 5-3 year
bins just because they start to get really noisy
looking at the June CPS. But if you look at the mean
childbearing for women who are at the age of 37-38, you see that that's
creeping up as we move towards the early '80s cohorts. But you'll see that
once you account for changes for these
earlier cohorts, we can measure at ages 40-49, these rates are even higher. In fact, we've exceeded too, but barely, for the
most recent cohort, and if you project this out for the cohorts
born in the early '80s, just based on what we've
seen in the past decade, we would also expect these
to continue to increase. The same thing is true
for childlessness. Here again, I'm plotting
childlessness at ages 37-38 by cohort, and these are exactly
the same birth cohorts as I just showed you
on the previous slide, and what we see as in
the last 20 years, we've fallen from
about 20 percent childlessness rates at age 37-38 to around 18 percent. But if we incorporate information for
childbearing after age 38, we see that rates
have fallen from just over 19 percent
to 15 percent. Again, if we use recent
experience to project that out, we expect those
numbers to fall below 15 percent for the
most recent cohort. Bottom line here, when
you're thinking about the evolution of childbearing
in the long sweep of time, there have been some really
big fundamental changes. There's a strong adherence now to what is a two-child norm. You see that peak everywhere in the data and that could shift, but it really hasn't changed
much in the last 30 years. You see slight reductions
in childlessness, which is, I think at odds with most
conventional wisdom, where people think that it's
actually been increasing, and both of these trends they're small but detectable increases
in children ever born. The other thing is that for
the most recent cohorts, falling birth rates
appear to have reflected delay in childbearing, not forgone childbearing
altogether. The thing to keep in mind too, is on top of these rates we've just been looking at, today, women have more access
than ever to information, medical reproductive technology, suggesting that birth rates at later ages may
continue to increase. Should we expect a reversal? The 1980s cohorts, they are only the beginning
of that decline in birth rates for the
more recent period. Maybe that not much
really happened for them, this is going to be the
topic of Kasey's talk, but I want to say
just a little bit about what we can
learn from history. Arguably, and you might say, the only major reversal in childbearing in US
history has happened, it happened during
the baby boom. That was the big thing. So
what can we learn from that? There are a few things I'll say to anyone who's worked on this, I started in my career and I spent years looking
for the correlates. It has to be related
to something, so why one day did everyone just wake up and decide they were
going to have more kids? This seems remarkable. Of course, there's something that's correlated with that. We have to be able to
understand this phenomenon. But I will say the
baby boom, in my view, is one of the biggest
unsolved mysteries of the 20th century, and so I'll encourage
you all to work on that. It happened with
very little warning and I think as an economist, and this is what
Gary Becker says and a lot of other
economists says, it's really easy, it's
just a big demand shift. Great. But what caused
that demand shift? Why did everything just
turn around so quickly? A few things about the baby
boom that are important, and I think important to contrast from the
current period. The decline in birth rates and children born were reversed, and it reversed very quickly. Birth rates for all
age groups increased and at the same time. That's different than today because we have
birth rates falling for some groups and
increasing for others. They reversed and increased
at the same time. Marriage rates skyrocketed
because back in those days, people had children
within marriage. The people who were having
children, these cohorts, they used the tools
that were available to have more children. They started sooner, they got married sooner, and
they ended later. Now, the explanations, there's a number of
these in the literature, if you're fascinated
now by the baby boom, I encourage you to look at them. There's a number of
things people have said; affluence, the introduction
of sulfa drugs, the work glut for older
women that basically depressed wages and precluded
young women from entering, so that they stayed home
and had a lot of babies. There's a lot of really interesting
explanations out there, but the existing
explanations, in my view, are incomplete because
anything that can generate the massive increase of the baby boom fails to
predict its decline, because there's not really something that turns
on for 20 years in the US economy or health system that then
turns off in 1960, and that's the problem, is you need something that's going to help you with both. There's a lot of
work to be done on. There's a lot of
things too that are very different from today, and when we see declining childbearing before
the baby boom, we're talking about things
that are very different. Today we're talking about the emergence of two-child norm, lower, low, and falling
rates of childlessness, marriage and partnership rates contrary to popular opinion, once you account
for cohabitation, are at all-time highs, and there's a fading
correlation of marriage to the start
of childbearing. It's not completely irrelevant, especially for more
educated women, but it's just not very
predictive anymore. People are having children
in and outside of marriage as they like. Women today have financial
and legal access to modern contraception and
abortion until recently, where this is changing a
bit and that's something that Caitlin Myers is going to talk a little
bit more about. If you're interested in some of these trends and thinking
about them more, a lot of what I'm
showing you here is from a paper that I did
with two co-authors, Melanie Guldi and
Brad Hershbein, Is There a Case for a Second
Demographic Transition? Where we argue that in
fact, we think there is. Now for demographers,
these are fighting words. That's like introducing
another paradigm, another model of the world. But we think there's a lot of trends that suggests
we're actually working in a very new equilibrium
today in part because so many of these
things have changed. The last thing I want to
talk to you about though, is a feature that is not part of what we've been
talking about so far, but it's something
that I think is really important to keep in mind, and for me maybe one of the
most important parts of what I refer to as the second
demographic transition, and that's its relationship
to inequality. It's really hard to think about inequality over time by metrics like
say, education, because having a college
degree at the beginning of the 20th century and having a college degree today are very, very different things and very different women
select into those groups. What we do to make
these big comparisons over time is we use
education quartile. Essentially, we're looking
at the lowest 25 percent of women's education group, and then the top 25 percent. This is nice because
we know it's well measured even for
non-working women, which also changes dramatically
over the 20th century. It's a fairly stable marker though we know that
there's some creep in the censuses for the same
cohorts across time. It's correlated with
mother's own background, and it also determines her mate who she ends up marrying, and also her lifetime income. It's comparable across
broad periods of history. When we compare
outcomes of women in the top education quartile
to the lowest quartile, how do these figures change? Again, this is really
gratuitous history. We go back to 1820 here, and I put this up
because it took us a really long time
to put together. I'm very excited
about these numbers. These have never been seen
in a public forum before. Mean children ever
born by age 44. You can take this all
the way back to 1820 and pull it all the way up
to the most recent cohorts. This line here in the middle, this is the mean over all women. What you see is in contrast to the declines in the
general fertility rate, and I will say some
of those declines are based on population
projections that turned out to need some revision with the
introduction of more censuses. But when you look at the mean children
ever born and you do a variety of things to adjust for mortality
and things like that, what you really see is
this starts to drop in the Postbellum period with
American industrialization. That's a really
important and I think shift from what we
thought was the case. The other thing you see is, here's what I showed you before. It maps very well to
the overall trends in the general fertility rates
and it fluctuates much less than the total fertility
rate, for instance. Now what you see for the least educated
women is that they've always tended to have
more children on average. Then this tracks
really, really neatly. The number of
children they have, for the low fertility cohorts, drops from almost three to right above two in
the more recent period. What you see for the most
educated women, and Jim, this is for you because
you were trying to project out how many grandchildren
will I have. For all of you with children
with college degrees, your kids are right here. You see that the rates are also falling pretty
much in lockstep and that more educated
women have always had fewer children than the average. That increases
dramatically during the baby boom and falls off almost back to where
they were but not quite. So they're having slightly
more as the baby boom ends. But the interesting trend here is that the numbers
are increasing. They are about at 1.8 now. If you think that the
behavior of the affluent is a leading indicator of what's going to
happen for others, Princess Diana had two children, Kate Middleton had three, and we're talking about
four type of situation, Chelsea Clinton just
welcomed her third, this might be an indication
that fertility rates, especially among
more affluent women will continue to rise. We also see some really
interesting and I think corresponding trends in
childlessness by education. Again, I'm plotting the mean
here right in the middle. These are the women in the
most educated quartile, and these are women in the
least educated quartile. Childlessness rates tend to be lower for the least
educated quartile. We see everything maps pretty
well to the baby boom. We see that these groups
of women were very different in the past
where more educated women were significantly
less more likely to be childless than less
educated women. After the baby boom,
we see that skyrocket, at least for the
first several cohorts for a decade or so. But starting with the cohorts of 1960 and moving forward, rates of childlessness for the most educated have
also plummeted. Jim, this is also good news for you if you haven't
had a grandchild yet. It's increasingly
likely you will. One of the things that I
think makes a lot of people, when people are thinking
about how many grandchildren will they have is that there have been
tremendous changes in age at first birth. Often you see these rates and vital statistics looking at the average age at
which a woman in a point in time had a child. That's what comes
out of the NCHS. This is different. This is
a cohort-based measure. Here, we're looking at
women at the end of their reproductive
lives looking to see when they had their
first child on average. This is the mean. I think this corresponds
very closely to the figure. It looks we're hugging a 24.5 for the low fertility
cohorts of about 1910, we fall during the baby boom to a little bit below
23 and we rise backup. But that doesn't look
particularly interesting. It looks like we're
right back on our historical trend more
recently and leveling off. But what that mean
really misses is the tremendous differences in this change by the
more educated and the less educated women. Well, unremarkably, I think more educated women and a lot of the women I
know in this room, maybe a lot of the people
you know have delayed. You see the mean age
at first birth really, really rising going forward
and it starts to get really, really noisy when you start to look at modern small surveys, but the trend here
is consistent, so I wouldn't take
as much away from those fluctuations as
the broad trend up. But really remarkable
is when you look at what happened to
the least educated women. Here for the birth
cohort of 1930, these are the baby boom
cohorts, everything was low. But after the baby boom, we see almost no recovery, if any recovery at all. It might even be
falling more recently, but that's probably just noise. I'd just go for a flat trend. What's fascinating is that
in the last 20, 30 years, as the most educated women have dramatically increased
the age at first birth, the least educated
mothers appear not to have and
increasingly more of those children are born in
a non-marital relationship. This is really fascinating. One of the things,
so the good way to look at some of the
more recent trends in delay, decreased
fertility rates, especially for young
less educated women is that perhaps
they're changing and maybe starting to change their behavior to be a
little bit more like that we've seen for the
most educated mothers though that's
complete speculation. What do these things mean for the future of US childbearing? One of the things we've seen is a tremendous changes in the
composition of mothers. I will also say composition have big implications for the living circumstances
of children. For the most educated women, we're seeing increasing delay. Age of first birth is rising. Age of last birth is rising. They're less likely to be childless and
they're more likely to be in a stable partnership,
typically married. This means that they
have two incomes. Those children will
have two incomes. It also means that those
children are being born much closer to the peak
earnings years for women who are older
and further along than children born to the most educated women
say 50 years ago. Even relative to
other educated women, children of educated women today are in much stronger
economic footing, have many more
resources at home. Now for the less
educated mothers, you see that age of first
birth seems stable, so that's not really pushing up. They're more likely to
be childless than in the past and they're
also more likely to be in changing partnerships, whether non-marital partnerships or marriage and divorce. This means incomes are
much less certain. The combination of
those forces mean that those children are
going to be significantly worse off when
they're growing up financially than women in
the more educated class, and that gulf is really rising. One of the things that I think we may be talking
about in 20 years of the Social Security
Administration meetings that we're not
talking about today, is that without
policy interventions, I would predict
increasing disparities in the productivity of workers coming from these two
different groups. Thanks a lot. I'll end there. If you're interested in
some of my work and some of the places I'm drawing
these statistics, you can check out my website
and also the paper I'm drawing on those [inaudible]
is an NBER working paper, 19599. Thanks very much. Kasey Buckles: Well,
thanks to all of you for being here and to Jim for organizing this panel and for
the other panelists, we've already had some really
great conversations just putting this together that I've been happy to be a part of. Thanks to Martha,
I think she set up my talk really well here. While she gave us a 200-year look in some
cases at US fertility, I'm really going to
be drilling down on what's been happening
over these last 10 years, which as we've seen
a really shaping up to be a fascinating
period in US fertility. I want to do that to try to
understand what we think might happen going
forward and what that means for the
SSA's projections. We've seen this picture
now a few times. This is that total
fertility rate number. Here, I'm just
limiting it more to this period that I'm
interested in of 1990 to 2018, and really especially
these last 10 or 11 years, as I've said, if you look
1990 through say, 2007, total fertility rate
was really bouncing around between 2 and 2.1, until we reached a peak
at TFR of 2.12 in 2007. But that's the year
which we began this really
remarkable decline to the point where we now have the lowest total fertility
rate in US history at 1.73. That's an 18 percent
decline since 2007. In just 11 years and 18
percent fall in that measure. Now, I think to really
understand this, you have to scratch
below the surface of these aggregate trends and
really try to understand what's happening for
different groups in a way that Martha and Karen have
already done a little bit. I'm going to switch
to talking about the general fertility
rate or the birth rate. Martha also showed us that
using both of these measures, you basically get
the same story. That's true here as well. In 2018, we had historic
low birth rate of 59 children per 1,000
women age 15 to 44, and that's a 15 percent decline in that measure from 2007. Let's start to now
break this apart. I'm going to do that
first hereby age. It's not a coincidence
that Karen showed you a similar picture with birth rates by
five-year age cohorts. I think of this as really the Rosetta Stone for trying to understand what's going on with long-term fertility trends, looking at what's happening
for specific age groups, let's start with teen women. We've already seen that
they were on a decline. Teen fertility reached a
local peak in 1991 in the US, but really declined through
the 1990s and early 2000s. But we've then reached
a plateau here, there we go, reached
a little bit of a plateau here in
the early 2000s. That some of us who
study teen fertility, the fertility of young
women thought that we might have leveled off or even
started to see an increase. But then in 2007,
it starts to fall dramatically again
to the point where we have seen a 58
percent decline in teen fertility in 11 years. That is just astonishing
that it has fallen that far in such a short
amount of time. Let's move up to
the next age group, which is women, 20-24. Here we also we're
seeing a decline. I so badly want to walk over there if you've
seen me present before, you know, I'm usually
running around like crazy. Jim tells me I have to stay put so I'll use the laser pointer, but we see from 20-24, this has been a high
fertility group declining a bit
over this period. But again, I'm drawing
this line here, 2007, they really started
precipitous decline so that we get fertility
rates that are 36 percent lower in 2018 than they were in
2007 for that group. Women 25-29 have had the highest fertility over
most of this period here. Quite flat from
1990 through 2007, but they too started
to decline in 2007, so that their fertility rates
are now 20 percent lower. Such that they are now no
longer the most fertile group. That title actually
belongs to women, age 30-34, which I also
find really astonishing. This group now has higher
fertility than the 25-29. They have not experienced. These women over 30 have not experienced this
decline since 2007. It's been actually quite
flat for the 30-34, maybe a little bit of decline in the recent years increases for 35-39, and 40-44. Hopefully, you've got in
this sense at this point in our panel that the fertility
decline that we're making so much of in the press and that we're paying so
much attention to is absolutely a story of young women fertility
falling for women under 30. It's staying flat or even
increasing for women over 30. If you want to start to project even maybe a little further than what Martha was
doing in her talk, the big questions are, are we going to see those low rates for
young women persist? Could we see them
fall even further? Then, are these births
delayed or birth foregone? Of course, that one is really the multi-billion-dollar
question from the perspective of the Social
Security Administration. To do this now, I want to look at a picture
that's similar to some of the ones that
Martha was making, where again, shifting to a
cohort measure of fertility. She was constructing hers using the June CPS fertility
supplements. Here I'm using the
birth certificate data, so I'm collapsing all of the years of the birth
certificate data, calculating the
number of births to women born in different years, and then dividing by the
size of the cohort at age 15 taken from the census. What we see here in
the bottom line, this is the total number
of kids had before age 20. Then we go up to before age 25, 30, 35, 40, and 45. Martha, I think, did
a really nice job of talking about what
has happened for these cohorts here
and getting up close to those born
in the early 1980s. Let me look at those
early 1980s cohorts. The last group for
which we can see their fertility by age 35, are the women born in 1983, if we look at those women, they are having fewer
children than women born even just a few years
ahead of them, say in 1976. By age 35, they're having fewer than two kids
still at 1.88. They do have some ground to makeup to get to TFR of two, which is both historically
relevant number and a number that reflects
the SSH projections. But as Martha said, they have some time
to make that up with fertility post-age 35. I want to push beyond though
where Martha stopped and talk about the post 83 cohorts. Take women born in 1988. Now we're really getting
into the millennial cohort. We can only see these
women through to age 30, but if we do that, their fertility is
really strikingly low, I think even compared
to cohorts just 10 or even seven or eight
years ahead of them. They're looking at it by age
30,1.2 children per woman. Now, they're only 30, so they have time to make up, but they need to get on it. They're going to have to do
it at quite high levels. If you think of, as Martha said, those baby boom levels of fertility post age 30 is
being what's possible. They're going to have to be quite close to that actually. While that might
represent something like a biological frontier. Maybe you would think
that biologically given advances in
reproductive technology, they could do even better. Of course, labor force
participation of women age 30-34 is 30 percentage points lower than it
was for women in 1957. I personally think that for at least these most
recent cohorts is going to be quite
difficult for them to have the levels of fertility post age 30
that they're going to need to catch up
to that 2.0 mark. For these very specific mid
to late 80s birth cohorts, my estimation is that completed fertility will
be a little bit lower. Now, I've done this talk here and several
of these slides. I've drawn a line at 2007 and in a room full
of economists, I'm sure you're all
screaming in your heads, Great Recession,
Great Recession. Normally when we draw
that line at 2007, and that's why we're doing it. If you think about
these cohorts who were born in the mid to late 1980s, they are coming
of age graduating right in the worst of
the Great Recession. We know very well that
graduating college, being young during a time of a severe economic
downturn can have long-lasting scarring
effects on the labor market. There is good
evidence that that's also true for fertility. This paper by Janet Currie
and Hannes Schwandt, they look at the
unemployment rate that women face in their young
years, say age 20-24. They show that for each one
percentage point increase in the unemployment rate that you face at that young age, we expect about 14 fewer kids in terms of completed
fertility per 1,000 women. These women who graduated
college in 2008 to 2012 faced about a five percentage point
higher unemployment rate than is typical. I think that suggests
that we would of course expect for them
to have lower fertility, or at least that's a good
reason why we would expect them to have a lower even
completed fertility. That's talking about that very specific Great Recession
affected cohort. I think if you want to try
to look even beyond that, we can try to learn from these cohorts though about
what the factors are that are contributing to the very low fertility
rates of young women. There are many, many explanations that would
fall into this camp, and in my 15 minutes here I don't have time to
touch on most of them, I'm just going to do a couple. One though that I want to mention is changes in marriage. I think a lot of people will look at a talk
like this and say, well, marriage
rates are falling, age of marriage is declining, and so that's why we're
seeing declines in fertility and increases in
the age at first birth. To me I really see those as
two sides of the same coin. It's hard for me to
think of something that would have dramatically
affected marriage rates but not fertility so that then that change affected marriage which then
affected fertility. The explanations
I'm thinking of, I think of them as affecting
family formation generally. The two I'm going
to talk about are economic factors and
access to contraception. We've already started with
the economy a little bit with these very specific
Great Recession cohorts, but if we think bigger picture, if you look back at my total
fertility rate picture, we've continued to
fall every year. We're getting 2016, 2017, '18, a two percent decline
in fertility even now. Of course, we would
have expected a decline coming out of
the Great Recession, or as my paper with Dan
Hungerman and Steve Lugauer, suggests a decline
in fertility even before the Great Recession, where we look at fertility as a leading economic indicator. We should have seen a
recovery in fertility by now if the main explanation was the business cycle effect
that's happening there. We are not seeing that at all, so this is something
we refer to in our paper as a
babyless recovery. But if we think about this recovery that
we're experiencing, the economic recovery, we
know that the recovery has not been fully felt by all parts of the
income distribution. I'm going to show you
some pictures here now where I'm switching
to the CPS because unfortunately we don't have income information in the
birth certificate data. This is average household income by income quartile for
women of childbearing age. First, just to show you that the recovery has not
been the same for all parts of the
income distribution. Here this is women in the top quartile of
their household income, and they did experience
a decrease in real income right after
the Great Recession, but started to recover around
2011 so that they are now at or above the levels
that they were before the Great Recession began. For these other groups
though it's been more flat and there has not
been complete recovery. I'm going to switch here. This is the same
picture but just so we can see it a little
bit better changing the y-axis to look at
the low quartiles here. Now for the lowest
income quartile, we're getting the
decline a little bit later when they reach
their trough here, maybe 2013, 2014, and still not quite fully at the level
that they were before. If I use these exact same data to talk about what's happening for fertility for these
income quartiles, all of the groups
saw a decline in fertility post Great Recession, but at least the top
two maybe the top three quartiles we're seeing that it's flattened out or maybe
started to tick up a bit. But for the bottom quartile, we're continuing
to see a decline in their fertility even as the recovery is
fully underway. Now, I was talking with
Caitlin just before and so she had actually looked at the fertility expectations. We've seen that the expectations are actually quite stable, but she said that she
had noticed that in the latest NSFG that for
low-income young women, she is seeing a decline in their fertility
expectations as well. I put this figure
together really thinking about what's happening with the Great Recession, but I think one of the
biggest things that jumped out to me is
that we just have this long-term convergence in these income groups
in their fertility. That's similar to
what Martha was showing us with
education where you have the lower-income groups now having fertility that's more similar to those of the
high-income groups. In terms of these
economic factors, I think the fact that the
lower-income groups are not fully enjoying an
economic recovery could be contributing to the long lag
that we experience here, that may also just be part
of this longer trend. I want to mention a couple of other issues that are related to the economic recovery
or economic issues. We have seen a strong recovery of the housing market as well. This paper by Lisa Dettling and Melissa Kearney shows that actually high housing
prices suppress fertility of people who are potentially
first-time home buyers, which makes a lot of sense. If you're in the market and
you want to start a home and buy a place where you can
put a couple of kids, it actually doesn't
work in your favor when housing prices
start to go back up. That's working against
increasing fertility rates. Then there's some early work looking at the role
of student loans, which is something we've seen a lot of conversation about in the popular press but
not as much work on. The second thing I
said I wanted to mention was contraception, 2a here on the contraception
front is better access. Some work that I have
with Lucy Schmidt, who's here, and Melanie Guldi, really points to contraception possibly playing a role because this decline in
births that we're seeing, if you think about
it happening for young women, for
unmarried women, women in low-income groups, those are groups that
have historically been more likely to
have unintended births. In fact, in this paper
that we have we're showing that there's
been a decline in the proportion of
births that are unintended since about 2009. That suggests a potential
role for contraception. It is not, however, I want
to say, driven by abortions. The abortion rate has also been falling over this period, so it's moving in the
wrong direction to explain this fertility decline. But how might we have
achieved or why might we have seen better access to
contraception in this period? If some of you were looking at those pictures and
screaming Great Recession, probably another half
of you were looking at those pictures and screaming
Affordable Care Act, which is happening
over the same period. Now the timing of this
is not exactly right, so we're seeing
this decline in '07 and Affordable Care Act its first provisions
don't come in until 2010. But I think of this as
maybe a one-two punch. We have the Great Recession that lowers fertility rates
as we would normally expect, and just when we might
start to come out of it, we get this expanded
access to contraception. Really importantly, since we're talking
about young women, in 2010 we have the young adult provision
that allows for women to be on the insurance
of their parents, and there's already a couple of really nice papers
that show that indeed lead to decreases in
fertility for women under 26. But then later we have access
coming to other groups through the private
insurance mandate and the Medicaid expansion. Lucy and Melanie and I are
now working on trying to understand the role of
the Medicaid expansions. The 2010 papers here talk
about the use of LARCs, and I know this is
something that Caitlin is going to talk about
a little bit more. But we now also have
much higher rates of use of these long-acting, so five years or more
in the case of IUDs, very effective rates
of contraception. This is from Martha's Oxford
Handbook chapter with Jason Lindo showing
rates of LARC usage. As recently as these
2006-2010 NSFG, you're getting about five percentage of
contraceptive women aged 15-24 using LARCs,
that's now tripled. I did the calculation for 2018, we're at 18 percent. A shift toward this more longer
acting effective method, I think really could contribute to keeping these fertility rates for young women really low. I don't mention that this is not just the Affordable Care Act, but there's been a real shift in the way doctors
think about IUDs. It used to be that they would recommend them only
for older women, married women who had
already had a child. In 2009 there was an opinion
that came out and said this is an effective method for all women and we should
be using it accordingly. To sum up here,
what can we expect for the next 10 years
or even beyond? As I said, I think we have a small cohort that came of age in the
Great Recession where my expectation is that
they will not quite reach to as their
total fertility rate, but we have this
long-term fertility trend toward the lower fertility of the young women and also
of low-income women, and the potential that we've reached a tipping point
in the use of LARC. Those things I think are reasons to believe that we might not quite see two or much
beyond two going forward. Of course, if Martha's talk
taught us one thing is that big things can come
along and disrupt this and cause
really giant swings. I think I'll leave
it to Caitlin to talk about abortion
as one of those. I'll just transition
to you right now. I think that's a good
place to stop. Thank you. Caitlin Myers: Hi.
I'm Caitlin Myers. I'm at Middlebury College. I pretty much agree with everything that
has just been said. In particular,
fertility rates are falling quite dramatically if you have a short-term
perspective, not so dramatically if you have Martha's long-term
historical perspective. That fall is driven in very large part by reductions in births to women aged 15-24. In fact, I was looking at
that country comparison and seeing that the US fall was so much greater than
other countries. The other difference between the US and most of
those countries is our teen birth rate
at base was much, much higher, and our
teen birth rate is plummeting and driving
a lot of these changes. I also agree with Kasey, whether this trend will continue depends on the underlying cause. Rather than showing
you the same trends in green with everything, I'm going to talk about a little bit of evidence
on what that cause might be in terms of just mechanical
causes of pregnancy. Going to be a little
bit of sex ed here. I took sex ed in the rural deep South in an abstinence-only
class, so get ready. I've learned some sense. I'm going to talk about some of those mechanical causes
and I'm also going to have an eye to those potential
disruptors. It's really hard. We don't know what
cause the baby boom or ended it necessarily. It's really hard to
think then that we might know at this point whether we're about to have the same type of really
dramatic shift or not, or whether this is just a
relatively modest delay in fertility and not
much is about to happen. It's hard to know. But since I'm going last, I figure I get to throw out some wild theories about
potential disruptors. Things you might look for that might be going on that
nobody has mentioned yet. Also, I'm going to talk
about the potential for a future change in
abortion policy to be another disrupter. I just said all that. I think it's really
useful to organize our thoughts by thinking about a fertility decision tree. Economists love fertility
decision trees. MALE_1: Audience is
ready [inaudible]. Caitlin Myers: What's that? MALE_1: We have a mature
audience [inaudible]. Caitlin Myers: Oh,
yeah, get ready. I stole this from Phillip
Levine, so credit to him. But economists really like
fertility decision trees. They help us organize
our thinking about what produces pregnancy and births. Anytime I present fertility
decision trees and talk about rational decisions
at various nodes of them, non-economists laugh
sometimes uproariously and it disrupts the whole talk. But let's think, in particular, about the choice of
whether to have sex, the choice of whether
to use birth control, and although it's not on here, what method to use and how
consistently to use it, and then conditional
realization of pregnancy, the choice of whether or
not to have an abortion. These are the nodes that
have to just mechanically, somewhere in here, drive what we're
seeing with fertility. It's not about a deep underlying
cause yet necessarily, but just something has to
be happening to these. It's not abortion, I
agree with, Kasey. Abortion rates are falling, they're falling roughly
proportionally to declines in unintended
pregnancies. Abortion isn't the
story right now. I will talk about whether
it could be in the future. It's got to be sex
and contraception. Don't worry if you
can't read this, you don't need to read this, it's just an illustrative prop. I want to think about
the risk of pregnancy. To do that, I'm going to use a back-of-the-envelope
calculation that's popular in the
public health field. I'm going to take the National
Survey of Family Growth. I'm going to look at sexual behavior reported
by people there. Have they ever had
sex? Have they had sex in the last three months? What was the type of
contraceptive methods that they chose the last
time they had sex? For each one of
those I'm going to assign a probability
of pregnancy. The only one of
which I'm very very sure about is that if
you have not had sex, you have a zero
risk of pregnancy. For the rest of these,
they're based on estimates that are also
coming from the NSFG. If people use multiple methods, although this just
shows the first method that they report and it's
the most effective method, it's ordered by efficacy. If they use multiple
methods though, I'll actually multiply their failure rates
by each other. If they're using
condoms and diaphragms, I will multiply
those failure rates by each other and look at what's happening to the risk of pregnancy by age cohort. Here are trends in
the predicted risk of pregnancy by age group. What I think is really
interesting about this is for 15-19 year-olds, you see the fall in
the risk of pregnancy. If you do some
back-of-the-envelope calculations, that fall is just
the right magnitude to explain what's going on with their birth outcomes,
subtract abortions. Similarly, for older groups, you actually see some
increase for 35-44 year-olds, which is consistent with the view that women are delaying fertility and they
are increasingly likely to be trying
to get pregnant. But what I find a little bit perplexing is that
when I look at those 20-24 year-olds
and 25-34 year-olds, the 25-34 year-olds
are pretty flat, the 20-24 year-olds, these are fairly noisy. I'd like to have
confidence bands actually, but they might be
increasing, again. Now, how do we
reconcile that with the huge increase in LARC use? This is the same
graph that Kasey showed you that comes
from Martha's work, except for I've
broken the teenagers apart from the 20-24 year-olds. But we're all in agreement that conditional on using
contraception, LARC use is going way up. But the other thing
you want to know is that for older age cohorts, they are primarily
substituting away from vasectomies and tubal
ligation and toward LARC, and so that's not driving
what's happening, they're just substituting between very effective methods. What you see for
younger cohorts, although the scale makes it hard to see, is LARC use really, really is going up for 15-19
year-olds substituting from less effective methods could be driving
what's happening, not as much for 20-24 year-olds. Basically, for teens, we see the mechanical cause, they're having less
unprotected sex. For older groups of women, I'm not so sure. Maybe, maybe not, maybe there's something
else at work there. I think an interesting
question is, is there potentially
something else going on at those nodes of the
fertility decision tree? I'm wondering, in particular, about a couple of
potential options. One, are people having less sex? If you read this
Atlantic cover story, that's what I'm talking about. If you haven't, it's great. They're talking about the
potential for a sex recession. I would tell you there's
a lot of conjecture and not as much evidence
as one might wish for. I'm throwing this
out there as could this potentially be a factor in what we're seeing right now. The NSFG has fairly aggregate measures
of sexual behavior. Have you had sex in
the last three months? Have you had sex in
the last four weeks? But the GSS has some measures that let other people, I
haven't done this, this is Jean Twenge's work, but back out and estimate
annual frequency of sex. In other people's
work, her work, they've estimated that it's declined over a fairly
short period of time between 2000-2004 and 2010-2014. For young people aged 18-29, from 87 times per year
to 79 times per year, which is roughly a
month-ish less sex. If there's really
a sex recession, that could be a part
of the factor that's going on here in the
fertility decision tree. The other thing that could be happening is that women could be using contraceptive
methods more consistently. Now, LARC methods and sterilization are
virtually error-proof. But if women are taking the
pill more consistently, it's also possible that what we're seeing is a decrease in the typical use failure rates for some methods and that's what's going on that I'm not picking up in my calculations. But the other wild conjecture
that I'll throw out there, that might not be that wild,
but let's talk disruptors. Could there be something
else going on? It's possible that the
fecundity is declining. Other people don't have, I've never attempted
to use this data. There do not appear to be
great consistent measures of sperm counts and motility over really long periods of time that contribute to male fertility. But there are some
recent meta-analyses that try to correct for all the different methods
that they were using in these studies to count
and look at sperm. Overall, there's an
increasing consensus that basically sperm counts and sperm quality is on a pretty steep decline
in Western countries. That's not going to
have a continuous effect on fertility, it's really one of those
threshold effects, and so I can't find
good evidence yet, I don't know if it
can be created on how many men might be crossing
a fecundity threshold. But I would mention that this is another reason that the
probabilities of pregnancy potentially are
changing so as long as we're throwing out new
and different ideas. I think that's one thing
to keep an eye on. Those are different ideas
about what might have happened recently in addition to the things that have
been mentioned. Let me say one
more thing, sorry, before I move on about
the sex recession. Looking at that graph Kasey put up with the 2007
line, of course, we all thought Great
Recession, of course, we all thought the
ACA is coming, but you should
also think iPhone. The iPhone was
introduced in 2007, and this is, to my knowledge, at this point,
anecdotal conjecture. But one of the things people
are talking about with this sex recession is
that everybody is on their phone and not having sex. It is true if you
look at measures of teen risky sexual behavior
or if you just have a teen, I've got four kids in my
house, twins to teens. They don't make them
like they used to. They want to stay home
and be on their phone, they are Snapchatting
all the time. I keep trying to take
it away from them. They're pretty obsessed
with social media. My husband and I recently had a conversation about
whether or not we needed to force them to
go out and go to a party. It's possible that the
iPhone is another disrupter. Of course, it's possible
it's a whole lot of other things too,
around this time. It definitely isn't likely that abortion has played
a substantial role in what's been
happening recently. But I'd like to also consider the question of
whether we should keep an eye on abortion policy as a potential future disrupter. Could it matter? Here are some reasons
to think it might. As we all know as economist intentions don't
always match behavior. If you look at survey
evidence on what people say they intend and
compare it to behavior, when it comes to sex, this is particularly true. In one recent survey by
the National Campaign, 88 percent of
unmarried women aged 15-29 said it was really important to avoid pregnancy
on their lives right now. But among those who are at
risk of unintended pregnancy, 19 percent were using no
contraception at all, 24 percent were using
contraception inconsistently, and 17 percent freely admitted, it was quite likely they'll have unprotected sex in the
next three months. Not surprisingly, even
with the decline in unintended pregnancies that
Kasey is documenting which is driving a lot of the
decline in fertility, it's still the case that
a little under half of pregnancies roughly
are unintended. It's also the case
that about a fifth of pregnancies right now, about a fifth, it's falling, but about a fifth are aborted. If you think in the same way that
one might think of a total fertility rate, if you think of the
total abortion rate as the number of abortions that you might see women obtain in their reproductive
lifetimes at current rates, you'd expect that
about a quarter of US women would obtain an abortion in their
reproductive lifetime. It's worth thinking
about abortion just because it's so common, and it is a major mechanism that women used to prevent unwanted and severely
mistimed births. Just to give you a
sense of the scale, here's the total fertility rate. We've seen this a lot, but I added a pink line. What I did was just take the age-specific
abortion rate and use it to calculate a total abortion rate and add it to the total
fertility rate. Over the years that I've
got measures of abortion, reported abortions
being surveilled by the CDC and the
group mocker Institute. I don't have illegal abortions, which certainly have happened
in the past and are self induced and unobserved abortions
and are happening now. But what you see here, just to give you a sense of it, is that abortion
could play a really major role in total fertility. It has that potential. It's not my counterfactual. I'm not saying they
would all be births. I'm just saying
there's enough of them that abortion is
potentially salient. Similarly, this is the
age-specific fertility rates for 1960,1970, and 1980. You see the
well-documented decline as women are delaying births. But I go and add abortions
to the 1980 fertility rate. You see that it
can easily explain the gap more than explain the fall between 1970 and 1980. Abortion has that potential. Of course, this is
not causal evidence, but there's a fair amount of causal evidence out there
that abortion policy was a major causal
factor in what was happening in the early '70s. Joyce and coauthors estimate that it explained
about 82 percent of the decline in births
between 1969 and 1972. I've estimated that it explained about 80 percent of the decline in first births before age 19. It's mattered before. It's not driving current trends, but could it matter again? If you're paying any
attention to the news, there's a whole lot
happening right now in the area of
abortion policy. A lot of states have
passed abortion bans and near-total bans that are not
currently being enforced. People are discussing
the possibility that one of these new policies is one that could go to
the Supreme Court. I'm going to just as a
hypothetical exercise, not a prediction of the future, but as a hypothetical exercise, try to get a handle on how
much this might matter. Could this be a disrupter? The way I'm going to do it
is to use two papers that I just published with co-authors: Jason Lindo and Scott Cunningham and Andrea Schlosser
for one of them. Rachel Jones and Ushma
Upadhyay for the other one. Basically the approach
is to look at right now where all of the abortion facilities in the United States, we
have them geocoded. Right now which states
in the United States, if Roe were overturned are
likely to ban abortion? Because if Roe were overturned, it should really be a return to states for policy making. Nothing much would happen in
Massachusetts or Vermont. A lot would happen in
Georgia, West Virginia, Louisiana, and Texas, other
states where I've lived. What we do is we have those states we identify
that are likely to ban abortion and we artificially close the
facilities in there. We hypothetically close them. Then we use estimates
that we have of the causal effects of
travel distance to abortion facilities
on abortion rates and basically back out where and by what magnitude we expect abortion rates to
change across the country. If you look at this map, the counties that are pretty much white not projecting great, these are regions of the
country where we don't predict a change in abortion rates due
to travel distance, because travel distance
wouldn't change. But if you look at the
counties that are shaded, the ones that are the darkest red are counties
where we predict a more than 40
percent decline in abortions because they have substantial shocks
to travel distance. They're places that
have facilities right now that
would likely close. Then there's a back of the envelope calculation to get a handle on
magnitudes of things. Would overturning Roe
be the opposite side of the Roe coin in 1973 or
the repeal coin in 1970? What we do is basically
estimate nationwide what would happen to the
abortion rate and do it by age. Nationwide we predict about a 13 percent decline
in abortions. That's factored in
all these places where we have nothing happening. It's much bigger,
conditional on being in an affected region
and about a third. But nationwide it's
about 13 percent. We go and take the current. Well, I've done this,
this is not in our paper. For you, I took the current
age-specific fertility rate. I added a very lightly shaded
region that shows you what happens if I add
all the abortions being reported in this
country right now. Then I add a darkly
shaded region. How much would this go
up if 13 percent of those abortions were prevented
and resulted in births? The answer is actually, this isn't a very big change. This is an extreme circumstance
in which I'm modeling every prevented legal abortion
as resulting in a birth, which itself is quite unlikely. Other things might happen like women might self-manage
abortions, for instance. Pregnancy rates might
change, for instance. Even under this very
extreme scenario, the total fertility rates model to increase from about 1.85. I'm using the most recent
abortion data I've got this 2013. From 1.85-1.90. In a more reasonable
projection might be that about 30 percent of those abortions would result in birth. Then we're talking about maybe a 0.15 increase in the
total fertility rate. This hypothetical
policy scenario could obviously matter a
great deal to the 30,000 women a year who might be giving birth as a result. But in terms of thinking
about big projections, abortion was a major factor in fertility changes
in the early '70s. But I don't think it would
be the opposite side of the same coin if we were to see a major change in abortion policy
right now. Thanks Stephen Goss: Around the
mid-1960s, birth rates [inaudible] have been a lot higher than 3.0
in earlier years. But if you condition that
on survival to age 10, it's remarkable that you're
smoothing it out from 1875 all the way
up to about 1965, the birth rates were
at about three. The question is, is it a matter of desired
number of births or desired number of ultimate
surviving children that had been driving things? What we've seen, of course, is the fundamental shifts
since then of going from 3-2 in terms of realization
and presumably expectation and that's
been really a big deal. One of the things I'd like
to just observe a little bit about the baby boom period, probably one of the
few on the color in the room that have any
recollection back to that period, having been born early in it and having heard
from my parents, the baby boom obviously
got going with all this different
after World War II. I can tell you with my parents, they were obviously not unique. Everybody was knocking
out kids very quickly after World War II. During the war, it
was hard to have kids, you're not together. That started happening right away when people
are in their 20s and in their early 30s when they were really
having a lot of kids. To some extent, I think
what happens when the baby boom period was
ending and we see it peeking around 1960 and then starting
to drop after that. Well, to some extent
those people come back from World War II, they
had their three kids. That surge that happened after World War II you
would expect to come down. I think Caitlin just mentioned Roe in 1973 that
contributed to it. I can also share with
you that there was a period after the early 1960s, which has been called
Vietnam came along. That had some effect on people's interests in having kids and their hopes
for the future. I suggest also that
we look through these periods more than
just the economics. What's in it really has a big effect on people
deciding to have kids, get married, and
all the rest of it, is just what their
peers are doing. There's an awful lot of that. Like I said, after World War II, everybody was having kids
during the Vietnam era, not nearly so much. Question is, what are
we going in the future? One of the observation
too about what happened after the
baby boom period, I was just looking at
some numbers last night, we don't have a slide on this, but it would align
a lot with what you've seen in the
total fertility rate. If you look at the average
wage for workers in the US in 2019,
CPI index dollars. If you look at that, that
actually peaked in 1973, and [inaudible]
decline after 1973. It reached a low point in 1982. In fact, it didn't
get back up to the 1973 level on a
real basis until 1997. In terms of economic
determinants, to the extent that earnings
levels really matter, we see in addition
to Roe in 1973, we also saw that actual
earnings levels, the average wage for
all workers in the US started dropping off from
real terms after 1973, bottoms in 1982, and then start coming
back up very gradually. Didn't really start
coming back up until about 1988 or '89. That of course, is the fruit
in which we saw somewhat of a resurgence of total fertility
rates coming back up. We put a lot of attention and we always
do to the cohort effects, but pretty defects
really have a lot of influence on all of this too. If I could just [inaudible] for up to a
couple of the slides, I don't know if you have them available that I'd sent in and these really add
to and build on, I think to some
extent and probably overlap with an awful lot of what's been presented already. But on slide Number 2 that I had this [inaudible]
you're run through, nothing needs to be mentioned too much because I think it's all been
mentioned already. Sharon already ran through
the fertility is probably the most critical parameter of all for the age distribution
of our population, which simply determines
the number of elders and the number
of working age, which determine
almost everything economic for our society. Birth rates did drop after 1965. A lot of reasons just
mentioned for that. They returned about 2.0 level. This is the total fertility
rate in 1990-2007. Largely because of the effects of what everybody
described so far, but not using
technical term tempo. We had a lot of
change after 1965 of people at younger ages for many reasons starting
to have fewer kids. But then this has been
observed by many here, we started to have birth rates at higher ages especially
in the 30s going back up. Through expectations
surveys, Karen and others went through
other sum here. On slide Number 3, I think I just recreate what you've seen
from several people. Look at each specific
or by age group, birth rates for women, and in this case
it's since 1994. What put the baby boom period and the baby bus pass
stuff that's there. What we're really a primary concern and I think everybody is well described is where
we are going forward, especially what's
happened since 2000s, where we saw at least a
slight decline starting for the 2024 and of course the massive
decline to be under 20. But then we had a
turning point in 2007 where we started to have the reduction obviously are related at least to some degree in what happened
to the recession, employment and earnings levels. The bottom has really
dropped off for 14 to 19, not clear, we should expect that
to becoming back 2024, interesting also. The question really is, are we dealing with another
tempo effect like we had going on to some extent back
after the baby boom period? Everybody was a little
bit surprised when in 1990 the total fertility
rate came back up. Why? Because of tempo. A lot of people in the 1980s, would assume that we
would have forever a much lower total
fertility rates in 2.0 then the whole tempo came around and made
the difference. The question is, will
that be the case now? On slide Number 4, I
just tried to have fewer lines so
that we'd actually have a better chance
to looking at this. I think the selection
patriots I'm looking at here is much of what Kasey
did on the first slide. But here, I just looked
at the 20 up to 34. The 30-34 representing
really 30 and over, several observed that we've been having increases in
30-34 all the way up to 40-44 and this represents that in the period you can
see between 2000 and 2007. You can see the 30-34 and 25-9 were still rising nicely. It's the 20-24 that was
starting to fall off. But then as the recession came, everybody to 30-34 and above 34 also starting to drop
off pretty precipitously. Unfortunately, the
question is why? Slipping to Slide 5, there appears to be significant effects
from the economy and the earnings levels. We saw that certainly back in the 1970s and '80s when
earnings levels were dropping. They're at least associated
but obviously not the only driver but obviously
a contributor to what is happening there. One of the questions I think
we should really address, and I think we're
going to look at a little bit more
closely and I hope everybody will is when
things change like, for instance,
economic opportunity, what is the lag between
the effect of a change? It would appear as though
the data suggests and logic suggests that when things turn negative in terms of
economic opportunity, that might have a rather
immediate effect. Whereas when things turn more
positive it appears there might be a much more
of a lagged effect. I think one or two
of the presenters so far have suggested that it takes a while to catch up
when the economy recovers. Even though to some extent the economy has been recovering, we have not seen enough of that, especially at the
age groups where we would expect most fertility. On Slide 6, I just wanted to put it in here and Martha should've already really nailed this one about what's going
on with marriage. We've recognized for a long time that marriage is for
better for worse, not a prerequisite
for having children. We can see that
going back to 1994, marriage prevalence
all the way from 20 all the way up to 34
has really been declining pretty consistently and that
it's only basically since the recession that we've had the big drops in the
total fertility rate. In fact, I would
note that actually, the total fertility
rate didn't drop below 2.0 until 2010. Even in the first couple
of years of the recession, birth rates were dropping
for some months, but we didn't
actually pierce the 2.0 fertility rate and dropped below that
even until 2010. On slide number 7, tried to look at
economic determinants. Again, I'm just trying to focus on what Jim was describing this panel as being economic determinants so many
other things to consider. I'm glad that Caitlin
is the one who brought up sex and not me. The issues of abortion and all the rest and any
other consideration. But just looking at the
economic determinants on slide number 7, this is looking for these
three five-year age groups going from 20-34. What happened since 1994 in terms of the employment rate? Now, all these have
done employment rates relative to 1.0 for 1994 just so you could see what the trending was for
each of these age groups. These are not absolute. You can see that things were
doing nicely up to 2000. There was some pulling back in all three age groups
between 2000 and 2006. But then the employment rates really dropped obviously
in the recession down to lows around 2011 was
really substantial effects. Now, we've had some
pretty good responses back up for most of these groups less for 20-24
than for women in their 30s. The same is really basically
true for men although men have recovered less at all
age groups than women. If we flip to slide number 8, now getting into the
average earnings level. I mentioned just a
little while ago, that back in the '70s, even into the '80s, average earnings levels of real terms were not
really doing very well. Well here are real earnings similar for males and females. We can see things were
doing nicely up to 2000. Things were not rising all that much between 2000 and 2007. For those who actually
were employed after 2007, at least for quite a while
up to about 2013-'14, real increases were really
not very much at all, males even dropping more so. There's been some recovery since but this really speaks
I would suggest to the idea of even though the earnings levels in real terms have been
coming back up in general, is there a lag effect between that and when people
feel solid about the earnings levels
that we're going to remain in good
shape and therefore have the desire to
go and start having family formation
and having kids. Slide number 9 speaks a
little bit more to this. Slide number 9 shows the
relative earnings levels for people in these three
age groups compared to the overall earnings levels
for people of their gender. Females on the left and
males on the right. You can see that females
20-24 relative to overall female average
earnings levels dropped precipitously
since 2000 and even more precipitously
leading up to about 2012. It wasn't just that the
average earnings levels overall or overall even by gender doesn't really
tell the whole story. We've seen that in the
20s women and men, their average
earnings levels have really dropped relative to the overall earnings levels
for people of their sex. Certainly, that probably has some effect since it is
that these age levels as everybody's pointed
already that we're seeing the negative effects on the birth rates that
we can't avoid. Now, looking at slide number 10, I tried to combine
here the effects of the relative employment
rate effect and also the change in the
relative earnings levels. You can see this actually looks a lot like the other two slides, somewhat of a drop-off, especially for 2024 and 2000, 2007, but precipitous to the
bottom of the recession. Now, several of the
observed low weight. Things look like they're
coming back up to some extent after
about 2010, '11, '12 and so where's the
response in terms of total fertility rates
on those and impact in particular short
fertility rates for people with these ages? I would suggest
here that, again, when things turn bad, people tend to react
quickly to them. If you decide to have a
child Jared said that's that you're stuck
because there you can easily move things from
bad to several, I'll wait. I'll defer and it looks like there's perhaps a
lot of that going on. That is really left to be
the question for the future. One of the other aspects really probably
worth mentioning is clearly there's been
much discussion about millennials have
accumulated a lot of debt. Now, part of the persistence
of that debt may be because of the availability of jobs and the availability
of good-paying jobs it has not been as good for
them in their 20s as has been true for
some of the rest of the population and for
some prior generations. It's not just that
they've accumulated some student debt
but also having a hard time paying it
all for the jobs not being as good. Will this change? Will the trends up
in employment and the trends up in
relative earnings levels for people in their
20s continue up allowing things to be
better for these groups? Even if not, will we continue to see as the birth
expectation survey suggests some turn back up by having the
women in their 30s? I think several people said there's plenty of time left for women in their 30s obviously
to still have children. Will the economic
outlook be such that we would expect that
to be a recurrence? On my last little
slide on number 12, you can see what we have for the latest 2019 trustees
report in projecting for the birth rates for these three control age
groups going from 20-35. You can see we're
not really assuming there will be any
significant increase in 20-24 that many of
the effects discussed so far will probably persist towards a
newer level for them. The question is for
25-29 and 30-34, will 25-29 reverse well partly from what
we call a temporal effect due drop in
the birth rates that we've experienced
to such a great extent for women under 25? Will they now with better economic outlook
in the future start to move back up and will the temporal effect
for the 30-34, as it did back after
the baby boom period, will that start to come back up similar for 35 and older? In the one little dashed line I put on here is interesting. This looks at the
20-34 as a composite. Obviously, even in periods
where things were dropping between 2007 and 2017, that didn't drop as much
because the 30-34s were helping even during that period relative to the big
drop for 20-24. The question is, will we
for that primary age group, 20-34, which is where about three and four of
those actually occur, will we come back
to anything like the levels for those
age groups that we have seen in the past as
recently as 2000 or even 2007 or '8 prior to the big
effects of the recession? Huge questions. Jim, thank you so much for setting up
this panel and for letting me grab a few minutes
here at the end and the opportunity to hear all the other wonderful
presentations. We will benefit from this
greatly and appreciate it, and hope you all enjoy
a wonderful lunch. 