Roger Ferguson: Really
a pleasure to be here. Like many of you, I'm first very honored to have a chance
to spend some time on so many great economist. Most importantly, though
this lecture is quite important to me because I
think like some of you, I think of myself as a perpetual
Marty Feldstein student. Marty taught me graduate-level
macroeconomics in 1978, I believe. Full disclosure. I was probably not
as best student, but I was certainly one of
his most attentive students. Now, Marty is teaching me a bit about tax policy
because he and I are working together
on the president's economic recovery advisory board and Marty is cheering
some work there. The arc of our relationship goes way back and
continues to this day. I also looked at his partner, Kate Feldstein everyone knows. I suspect Kate has not. I don't think you've
co-written anything recently, but when I was an
undergraduate student, Marty and Kate were also
famous because they had joint responsibility for
writing columns as well. While this is the Marty
Feldstein lecture, I know that my spouse
would want me to say something honoring
the other part of the Feldstein household. Let me then turn to the topic that you'd
expect me to talk about, one because it was advertised. But secondly, because
of my current role, which is I'm as Jim said, the President and
CEO of TIAA-CREF. We have about 3.7
million participants. When I joined the
role because I had spent so many years in academia, I think I knew about two million my
participants personally. I will now make sure I shake
hands with everybody else. When I meet all of you today, I will get myself to about 3.25 million participants
that I know personally. It's a pleasure to
see all of you. I'm going to stand on many of your shoulders here
and talking about this important issue
of retirement and retirement security
for the 21st century. Many of you have done some
research on that topic. I will be referring
to it hopefully not mangling your key results. Let me start by the point
that I think all of us know, which is that we clearly
are at a pivotal moment in terms of our national thinking about retirement and
retirement security. Over the past 30 years, the responsibility for
funding retirements and the associated risks
have been shipped from the employer to individuals. Second challenge that we
see social security one of Marty's topics provides retirement income
floor for retirees. But as we all know, the system will soon
annually pay out more than it collects. It's unclear when
policymakers will develop the appetite for making difficult choices to return the system to a more
stable footing. This is clearly the
intersection of good economic policy which
Marty has taught many of us. Politics, political economy very much at the fore when it comes to what to do
with social security and importantly when to do it. The third big issue is
the demographic challenge that we all understand. The largest generation in American history has
begun to retire. Seventy-six million of us baby
boomers will eventually at some point start to move from an accumulation phase
into a payout phase. That is going to be the
third big challenge. As though all of these things
are not complex enough. We're recovering from
the deepest recession that we've had in 70 years. A recession that has left many, if not most people
less confident about their ability to achieve
retirement security. Against all of those things, I think it's really
time to start to rethink the retirement
system for the 21st century. What I'm going to
do in my talk first is again, set the ground. Little more detail
I've done already. I'm going to talk about what I think are some of
the core features that would be part of a retirement system
for the 21st century. Hopefully avoiding going over the NBER line in terms of
making policy recommendations. But since I'm not an
academic economist, you'll forgive me if I move a little bit in that direction. Then I'm going to ask a number of questions that
I think you have been asking and leverage off of some of the work
that had been done by many people in this room. Then finally, I'm going to highlight three or four
research areas where I think all of you in this room who look at aging demographics, retirement, social security, etc can help those of us in the private sector
think through what we think the right answers are. Let me begin with a brief
overview of how the contours of the US retirement system have changed over the
past few decades. This is going to be
level-setting for most of you. The most significant
change obviously, is that defined benefit systems, the previous generation, have
become increasingly rare. According to the EBR, the Employee Benefits
Research Institute, only 33 percent of private sector employees have access to a defined
benefit plan in 2008. That compares with over
84 percent, 30 years ago. A dramatic shift in
the last generation. In the place of these
defined benefit plans, we see a patchwork of individual accounts
that is clearly putting greater responsibility
and greater risk for retirement income on
individual workers. 401K plans which has
all of you know, you should know were originally envision as
a way for Americans to supplement the pensions
made available by the employers have instead
become for many workers, their primary means of
saving for retirement. In doing so, the talk about
retirement savings has moved from how much you'll have at the end income in retirement. To the other question, which is asset accumulation. The entire dialogue or our retirement has
actually moved away from retirement and much more
towards asset accumulation. Many workers we think
now devote the bulk of their attention to their
quarterly account balances with little thought as to how their
accumulated savings will translate into a
steady stream of income when they retire. Throughout the '80s, the '90s and much of the past decade, an increasing reliance on market gains to fund retirement incomes was
largely unquestioned. But obviously, the collapse
of financial markets in 2008 and the ensuing a
global recession have caused many Americans, especially those
nearing retirement, to question whether they
will be financially secure after they
stopped working. Many are saying indeed, can they even stop working
and enjoy anything approaching the standard of living to which they
are accustomed. To be fair, that's a
good question because the evidence is mixed. For many people the
answer seems to be maybe they will not
be able to live in retirement anywhere proximity and degree of comfort that
they had while working. Jim introduced the fact that
I was a part of McKinsey. I will now quote from
McKinsey research. Last year, McKinsey
and Company found that the average
American couple will face a savings gap of around $250,000 at the
time of retirement, which obviously is a
huge amount of money. Importantly, average
401K balances have recovered some of
their lost ground in the market recovery that occurred last year and into
the first part of this year. But by any measure, and many of you who've
done these measures, most American workers clearly
have not saved enough. The question is, why is it that 401K framework fail to adequately prepare
workers for retirement? I think there are five
or six shortcomings that one can highlight
around 401K model. First, clearly lack of participation among
many eligible workers. Secondly, there was
insufficient employer and employee contributions. The third failure was the
failure or the inability of many participants to implement an appropriate asset
allocation strategy. Fourth, the failure to preserve
assets for retirement. Then fifth, the lack of annuitization of
accumulated assets in retirement to produce
a lifelong income stream. These shortcomings were largely the result from decisions made by workers because fundamentally
in the 401K contexts, retirement risk burdens, as I've said before, fall
disproportionately, often entirely upon workers who as many of you
are pointed out, are clearly not capable of
dealing with the risks. On the other hand, employers have benefited
substantially over the past three decades by jettisoning the defined
benefit pensions. Just taking one look at the auto industry tells
you, in fact, that's an industry
where their ability to reshape both retirement
liabilities and health care liabilities for
retirees turned out to be critical than allowing the
big three auto companies to avoid extinction. A new element that has entered all of this, is that across the country, state and municipal entities, are struggling with
large gaps between their promised retirement
benefits and current assets. While only 33 percent of
private sector employees, have an exposure
to or the ability to get into a defined
benefit plan, in the public sector, 79 percent of those employees have
a defined benefit plan. Again, that's
according to the EBRI. A recent SNP report found that the total unfunded public
pension liabilities in the US, increased to $457 billion in fiscal year 2008 from
$368 billion in 2007. What is a public
sector been doing? To cope with this
yearning deficit, public employers
are incentivizing near new hires to select defined contribution
retirement options rather than the
traditional DB options. While the decline of defined benefit pensions
and the rise of DC systems has clearly removed an element of security for Americans in the private sector, that is also occurring more and more in the public
sector as well. What we're finding is, there is a misalignment
that's starting to emerge. However, there are some ways in which the current
model actually does suit the current
working approach. There are more frequent
job changes including spells of independent
work, and for that reason, it makes less sense
for Americans that had their retirement savings tied
up to a single employer. Clearly three facts emerge
just as level setting. First, defined benefit
pensions have proved unworkable for the vast majority
of American businesses, and now the tide appears to be shifting in the public
sector as well. Secondly, DC retirement plans
defy contribution plans, which shifts responsibility
to the individuals, often offer less security
than defined benefit plans, and put too much emphasis
on asset accumulation, rather than the retirement
income planning. But third, Americans work
patterns have shifted, so that portability, and individual control, are attractive features that workers appreciate in
the current system. Given that set of
background facts, the challenge for policymakers, for companies such as
my own, for economists, all of you, for employers
and for individuals, is how to design a
retirement system that offers the flexibility
in individual choice, that seems to be consistent with the way people work these days, but still provide
some genuine security for individual savers, so that when market
declines do occur, as I think they inevitably will, retirees and near retirees, have an income floor to meet
their essential expenses. I think the goal
ultimately is to develop a retirement
system that is grounded in the realities and
not attempt to turn the clock back to a system that I think
will never return. You can imagine then that
our company, TIAA-CREF, has focused a great deal of attention on determining
which factors are most critical to responding to this plethora of challenges
that we've confronted, but the differences in the
way people work these days. There are many subsets of
individual needs obviously, but we've identified
three core elements that should be featured
in retirement system, providing what we think of as genuine financial
security in retirement. Again, here I'm going
to leverage much of the work that's been done by some of the people in the room. The three components of what I'm describing is a
retirement system for the 21st century are
first sufficient funding, which is clearly
going to require greater contribution by both
participants and sponsors, by both the employers,and
the employees. Secondly, as part of that, accumulated savings
must account for the full spectrum of expenses
that accompany retirement, especially health care expenses which tend to arise with age. The second core element of retirement system for
the 21st century, is appropriate diversification
and asset allocation, which for the average worker
I think is going to require increased access to financial
advice and education, along with something that many of you have
been focused in on, and appropriate
designed investment menu with a certain element
of automatic behavior. Then the third core element
that I'm going to focus on, is guaranteed lifetime income, and the form of a low-cost, relatively transparent annuity. I emphasize that because financial journalists
often criticize annuities for a
very good reason, which is that many
of them are not very transparent and
many are high cost, but I think we are
going to have to have a debate in this
country about what unsuccessful annuity
would look like versus some of the annuities that are currently
available on the market. Let me start and delve in each
one of those three areas, first, on sufficient funding. Recent research has
clearly demonstrated the overriding importance
of retirement plan and contribution levels
relative to other factors, including asset allocation for ensuring an adequate level
of retirement income. Workers who want to maintain
a standard of living close to what they enjoy the
end of their working years, at least according
to our research, should be aiming to replace at least 70 percent of their
final salary in retirement, and many say it should
be closer to 80 percent. This means that
individuals should save at least 10-15 percent of
their gross annual income. That represents both the
combined contributions from employers and employees. You can see the huge
gap that we have. Among 401k plans, sponsors contributions average, as some of you know, around
three percent of wages. But typically in the
form of matches, that are dependent on the
level of worker contributions, the most common match
today is 50 cents per dollar up to the first
six percent of pay. What we've seen is that among eligible workers
who participate, contributions average
less than six percent of pay for non highly
compensated workers, and around seven percent for
highly compensated workers. Adding to the challenge
of saving enough, is that currently half of
American workers do not have access to an
employer sponsored plan. Among those who don't have a
workplace retirement plan, fewer than 10 percent have
an individual accounts, such as a traditional
or a Roth IRA. On adding to this issue around
savings and building up enough for retirement,
is asset retention. Savings can only grow if
they remain in the plan, and 401k plans, which are allowed for loans, for hardship withdrawals, and lump-sum distributions, when workers change jobs, are replete with
opportunities for savings to leak out and be used
for other purposes. One of the major
expenses looming for retirement and something that does require
advanced planning and saving is health care. Again, looking back
at the EBRI research, they show that without an
employer sponsored health plan, a couple retiring
at age 65 today, is projected to need between
$200,000 and $800,000, to supplement Medicare and to cover other out-of-pocket healthcare expenses
during retirement. Now, obviously, the
state of health care, and health care
savings and expenses is likely to change
as many of you know, because some of you
worked in that area. This issue of how much it's
going to be required for health care and retirement
may evolve over time, but these statistics are
where we stand today. That's clearly a staggering
sum for most people. Let me go to the
second component of the retirement system
for the 21st century, which is appropriate
diversification and asset allocation. It turns out for
much of the research that you've done and others that 15-20 fund options
should give savers the ability to diversify their
investments appropriately. More choices can be
confusing and actually lead people to choose less
diversified investments. Workers often lack the
knowledge to choose appropriate investments and
diversify their savings. Olivia Mitchell, who was one of my classmates at Harvard, and Stephen Outcasts
in their book Pension Design and Structure New Lessons and
Behavioral Finance. That participants tend to
use, "A naive heuristic". They avoid extremes, pick the middle option rather than
maintain a consistent set of well-ordered risk preferences to select from the
investments offered. Furthermore, according to
Mitchell and Outcasts, many plan participants
seemed to lack a well-formed investment
preference at all. This confusion
about investments, investment preferences, and what to select
underscores the need for reliable and
independent advice is part of the retirement
system for the 21st century. Sadly, plans have avoided
providing individual advice. Historically, they've done
this because there has been a legislative firewall with clean planet administration
and planning advice. Because of the cost
inefficiencies of hiring multiple vendors, one for administration
and one for advice. Many plan sponsors
have historically opted for only administration, ie, not paying for the advice
or making that an option. Plan sponsors have also been reluctant to provide
advice because they are reluctant to assume
financial responsibility for the advice that is
provided to their employees. Just as the science
shows that people are often confronted
with too many choices, most plans do not
make room for advice. The good news there is that recent legislative and
regulatory changes have lowered the firewall between plan administration
on the one side and advice on the other. As a result, the defined contribution market
has in fact been moving to provide individualized
investment advice in recent years. The percentage of
401k plans offering investment advisory services has increased from about 37 percent. Call it roughly
around one-third in 2005 to about 50
percent last year. Investment and financial
education can have a positive impact on participant
investment decisions. Nonetheless, an individual
cannot be made to learn. As much research has shown, the reality is that many
workers do not have the time or the interest to develop adequate
financial literacy as it relates to retirement
planning and savings. The third core element of a plan for the 21st century
that will increase the likelihood of
achieving retirement security is to make guaranteed income for life and make those options
more broadly available. Guaranteed income in the form of annuities whose guarantee
obviously is subject to the claims-paying ability of the insurance company writing the contract can
make it possible to re-introduce an element of
security that is missing from most private sector 401k planned for the
past three decades. Annuities can be made
available within a plan as an accumulation
vehicle and as a distribution option
upon retirement or through both accumulation
and the distribution phases. At my company TIAA-CREF, we encourage people to annuitize at least enough
for their savings. That combined with
social security, they have an income
stream to meet their basic expenses
in retirement, housing, utilities,
taxes, food, etc. In addition, we also
encouraged them to recognize the value of these annuities payments should
ideally be protected, at least partially against
erosion by inflation, which means an annuity
language having both a fixed annuity and also
having a variable annuity. These three core elements, sufficient funding,
appropriate asset allocation, and guaranteed income,
should be I believe, at the root of all
of our efforts to help Americans safe
or secure retirement. We see from anecdotal
evidence that when one offers this approach, that has some
beneficial effects for both plan sponsors and
plan participants. I'm going to say one example obviously again from TIAA-CREF. Because I think we're the ones that are most
associated with your market, the higher education
retired and the market is the one that we
understand the best. What we've seen in our recent research
from our institute, is that 80 percent of higher education employees,
that's 80 percent, and I should note
that this includes employees across
higher education, not just our participants. Eighty percent
described themselves as being somewhat confident or very confident that
they will have enough money to live
comfortably in retirement. For those who have this model. Among all US workers, just about 50 percent
reports such confidence. Clearly developing this kind of model seems to have
the desired impact in creating a sense of
retirement security for those who have
that as an option. This now leads me to my third element that I want
to talk about, which is the behavioral aspects
of retirement challenge. The question is if we do
design retirement plans or a comprehensive
retirement system that provides more options
for people who save appropriately and turn
those savings into a steady stream of
guaranteed income, are individuals likely to take advantage of those options? Behavioral economists,
including some in the room, are clearly doing extensive
research to determine how system design can influence
participant behavior. Much of the literature
that you've been writing focuses on overcoming or leveraging apparently
negative tendencies such as inertia
and risk aversion. With new plant features and approaches including
auto-enrollment of workers and planned and framing choices in a way that motivates
optimal decision-making. With 401k plans, participation has
historically been voluntary on the part
of eligible workers. Therefore, one-quarter of
those eligible workers choose not to
participate in a plan. Some choose not to participate
for financial reasons, other for behavioral reasons
such as simple inertia, which seems to be a
powerful influencer in retirement planning. In his book, Aging Gracefully, Ideas to Improve
Retirement Security , Peter Orszag states, "We should recognize
the power of inertia in human behavior and use it to promote rather than
to hinder savings." Economists, plan designers, and policymakers have
looked for ways to use inertia to keep people
on the right track, anticipating that they
will not musk have the motivation to
deviate from it. One idea that is being applied
very broadly is to make the process of savings as
automatic as possible. The good news is
that plan sponsors have begun automatically enrolling eligible workers
and their 401k plans. Obviously, if they do
not wish to participate, they can proactively opt out. According to a recent
study by the GAO, auto-enrollment can
increase participation in employer-sponsored plans
to as high as 95 percent. But sadly, at this stage, only 16 percent of
employer-sponsored plans feature auto-enrollment was higher rates among larger plan sponsors. The EBRI reports that auto-enrollment has
increased the number of near-retirees who
are on track to have enough money to pay
for basic expenses and health care costs from about 41 percent in 2003 to
a little over half today. But auto-enrollment
for individuals clearly is not a panacea. The work of Choi leaps
and, and others, this was, I think worked
back in 2001-2002, identified there while
participation rates increase when employers
auto-enroll employees, the overall level
of savings may not increase because default
contribution levels tend to be fairly low and employees
remain "Anchored" at those low contribution levels and an overly
conservative funds. Now, more recent work
by the same group, Choi leaps and Brigitte Madrian and has been involved
in this as well, has shown in many ways, and how you structure the
default doesn't matter. Clearly, behavioral economists are giving us a good hint on which directions we should go in structuring the plans
that we put together. The other trend
that we've seen in an attempt to improve
asset allocation is that plan providers and
sponsors have made available lifecycle
or target date funds, which as you know, as an
investment vehicle that changes asset allocations
automatically over time based on target
retirement years without a savor ever having to
make another decision. In the wake of the
financial crisis, however, questions have emerged
about the design of Life-Cycle funds as some
funds may have been too aggressive or
perceived to have been too aggressive for workers
near retirement. Another idea that's emerged obviously is auto escalation automatically increasing an individual's contribution
rate over time, and that's also gained
broader appeal. Some work by Richard Thaler
and Shlomo Benartzi of UCLA has developed what's called a saving more tomorrow programs, which allows workers to schedule automatic increases in
their savings rates. According to their
first case study, participants increased
their satisfied rate from 3.5 percent to
more than 13 percent. I think this may also
be another lesson that those of us in the
private sector can learn from what you are teaching us
in the academic literature. That's one of the lessons
that we've learned. Now the other issue obviously is the so-called annuity puzzle. The question is, why is it
that so few households and individuals annuitize when we think that's probably for many
of the right things to do? First answer is that
employers have been reluctant to include annuities as
a distribution option. All 401k plans offer a
lump-sum distribution option, but only about 14 percent offer the ability to
annuitize assets. A commonly cited reason
for the plan sponsors reluctance to offer annuities is fiduciary and uncertainty. I think they are regulatory
clarity could go a long way. The other challenge obviously is why don't employees
purchase them. Research by Gale and John of Retirement Security Project, note that private
annuities account for just only two percent of
retirees' household incomes. The question is, what is
driving this annuity puzzle? We've seen two things. One is work by one of our economists at TIA
craft has indicated that if one has access to an annuity option during
the accumulation phase, you're much more likely
to take annuitization as a payer option and
that's very good. The other thing I think that
people worry about is, well, will there be buyer's
remorse if I annuitize, and there's good news there, which is that there seems
to be no evidence of buyer's remorse in regard
to payout annuities. Based on some research, as much as 89 percent of annuitance report
being somewhat were very satisfied with the decision to purchase the payout annuity. Then the final breakthrough on the annuity option that
comes from Jeff Brown, who I know is here
in the audience and in full disclosure, he was a TIA trustee. Jeff has been teaching us very much the
question around how to think about framing on that. As Jeff says, "When consumers think in
terms of consumption, they perceive the life annuity is offering valuable
insurance against the risk about living one's
retirement resources. However, when I think in
terms of investment terms, they view life annuities as increasing risk without
increasing return. Because of the potential
for variation and the total value of payments
based on how long they live." Clearly from Jeff's work, we've got to understand
how better to frame the annuity option. Recently though,
there's also been another discussion around
the annuity option, and this comes from
Eric Johnson's work and Eric is at Columbia. He expanded on the Kahneman and the Tversky research by focusing specifically
on retirees. What he uncovered is what he calls hyper loss aversion among retirees who are up to quote five times more loss averse
than the average person. We have a real challenge
when it comes to retirees. Interestingly, however, this hypersensitivity
to loss does not translate into a desire to purchase guaranteed income. Instead, what Johnson
has found is that retirees who exhibit
hyper-loss aversions are sadly less likely to
annuitize because they see giving up immediate control of their savings as
another type of loss. Clearly, in spite of
great research that's been done in plan
structuring and by behavioral economists
there are a number of topics and issues that
are open for study. I'd like to now turn to my last topic then open up
for questions and answers. But here are three or four
research topics that I, as a practitioner's area, would like to turn to you as researchers to help us figure
out what we should do next. The first is how to deal with the entire challenge of the fact that financial literacy or the low level of financial
literacy in our country. The challenge is clearly we've
learned a great deal from behavioral economists about
automatic approaches, automatic savings, automatic enrollment,
automatic escalation. The research has
shown that there's some potential upsides and maybe some downsides about
too much automaticity. The first question
that I worry about is, what is the right mix
of automatic plan features with advice
and education. Since we clearly know that automatic behaviors are
probably right on average, but it probably wrong for
many, many participants. You can help us think
about that balancing automatic behaviors
and education. The second question ties into the age, obviously
the participant. The second question I have is, at what point is a career is it advisable for a participant
to stop being an auto bot, if you will, and
become a planner who saves and invest according
to his or her own plan? We know that there's
generally an aversion to planning among all of us but at what point should we
really be pushing individuals to move out of
the automatic enrollment, automatic escalation and really start to think and
plan for themselves? Then the third issue is how much income
should people save, I've thrown a number
of 10-15 percent, I found as I've done the research for this and
others have supported me on it, that there's really no
consensus around that question. I think if you can
clarify that goal, we'll help individuals to fully understand what it is
that they need to save. Finally, and I think
most importantly, we also have to
recognize something that people do not
fully understand, which is they will
often be living in some form or retirement
for 20-30 years. How do we educate
individuals about the longevity risk
that they confront? Because I think it's
much easier for them to understand the risk of loss as opposed to the risk of
outliving one's resources. Let me start by saying just
a number of things first, are we clearly confronting our retirement
crisis in America, it's been made much worse by the economic crisis
but [inaudible] is in social security that Marty has been teaching
us about for many, many years and the aging
population have conspire to bring the current risks in the system much more to
everyone's attention. The second point I've made is that I think at
least it's going to be very difficult to go back to the system that we
had in the 40s, 50s, and even the 60s of defined benefit
plans for everyone. We do need a
retirement system for the 21st century,
as I describe it. That would have three
major components. First, is getting
people to save enough through a combination of
automatic enrollment, automatic escalation,
and education. Secondly, helping
them understand the importance of an
appropriate asset allocation, which can either be automatic
through life-cycle funds or through a combination of life-cycle funds and education. Then the third I made
was really we have to focus in on the annuity option, which is one that is simply underutilized by all Americans
for a variety of reasons. In many cases to do with the
complexity of annuities, but that should not stand in the way of fixing the problem. Then the forth point
I've made is that behavioral economists have
helped us a great deal, particularly in
doing some research around the automatic
state of things. But finally, I've
thrown a challenge of my four research questions
at the very end. With that, we agree that
I'd stop around 5:15, I will bring this to a close. Thank you very much for
your attention and I look forward to answering some
questions. Thank you very much. 