So this is Fiscal Issues
in the Times of COVID-19. So let me start the
beginning to this. So I'm going to give a
pretty high-level talk, which will reflect our, as
in the IMF's, thinking about the pandemic
and its impact, the kinds of global fiscal
policy responses we've seen. And this is one of
the virtues of the IMF is that we get to see what
189 member countries are doing that come from
all walks of life, and what are the specific
challenges that they're facing. And I think we-- at this point,
there are many more questions than there are answers,
but maybe this presentation might be good food for thought. And of course, we are going to
be coming out of this crisis. And even before we come
out of this crisis, we are going to be seeing a
situation where public debt is very high, the highest it's
ever been in recorded history for both advanced economies
and for emerging and developing economies. And so the question is, how
do countries live with that or how do they actually
bring down their debt levels? And lastly, about
fiscal policy being used for sustaining
the recovery, but not just sustaining
the recovery, but also about structural
transformation in terms of addressing issues also
on the resilience front, sustainable front, which is on
issues of climate, inequality, and bringing about a
more productive economy. So I think this is
obviously a fantastic time to be a public finance economist
because the kind of issues that we're grappling with are
squarely in your wheelhouse. So let me just give you
a very quick outline of the pandemic and its impact,
and tell you where we stand. So this is a snapshot
of the pandemic in terms of the left two charts. You can see that. So if you look at
the left graph, what you see is that we had-- the green line is for
advanced economies, the number of new cases
in advanced economies. You had the first wave
that was in April and May. And that came down into
July, but then after that, July you had this
again into August, and especially now we're
seeing second waves. For emerging markets, it's still
the first wave that continues. And for low-income
countries, you have climbing cases, but
at least the counted, measured cases remain low. But there are still risks of
things getting quite bad there, too. So everybody was concerned
about the possibilities of there being second waves,
and that has played out. But if you look at
the middle graph, you can see that the new deaths
are nowhere near the peaks that we saw in the first wave. And even for emerging
and developing economies, you see that the new deaths
are not anywhere near what we had seen in the past. And this reflects
a couple of things, which is that the numbers that
we've seen in terms of cases going up reflects more testing. But also it reflects the
fact that the demographics of the people
being affected have shifted from the elderly
to the young, who can deal with this health
crisis much better. But an outcome of this
resurgence in the virus has meant, though, that the
reopenings that we saw-- and you see this
on the right graph, you see the measure
of the stringency of containment policies. You can see that those
lockdowns were coming off starting around April into
June, and then into July. But then afterwards,
they've stalled. And so the resurgence
of the virus has basically prevented
us from going back to business as usual, and
at a fairly early stage. And alongside what
the graph also shows you is that
mobility that fell off the start of the pandemic,
that started improving in May and June, also has stalled. So I guess we will
step back and think that I would say that
the global economy hit a real trough, especially
in the second quarter, with unprecedented
levels of contraction. From there, economies
are healing. You have started
to see recoveries. However, it's not
something that's going to be over very quickly. As long as this health
crisis is still around us, and we have these resurgence
of viruses, of these cases, we are going to continue to
have activity remain well below pre-COVID levels for a
long time, for most countries in the world. So here, what you see is
other interesting feature that you see about the kinds
of recovery that we're seeing, which reflects the
importance of this is a health crisis
first and foremost. So again, if you look
at the left graph, this is purchasing
manager's indices, which captures sentiment
about future activity. You see a steady improvement
in those PMIs going into July and into August. And you see more of
those improvements for advanced economies
as opposed to emerging and developing economies. But after that, you see
some signs of stalling. So if you look at
the middle graph, you have countries and
their PMIs in August relative to what
they were in July. For manufacturing, you
see that many countries are above the
45-degree line, which is that the recoveries continued
into August after July. But if you look at
services, on the other hand, you see that more
of the dots are below the 45-degree line,
which is that you're seeing a stalling in the recovery. And again, that's a
reflection of the fact that we still don't have
a solution to this health problem. And in the absence of that,
lockdowns or no lockdowns, there is going to be more
voluntary restraint, more social distancing and less
activity, less engagement in contact-intensive activities. So again, so just
to summarize, we had a deep, deep
recession, unprecedented, in the second quarter for
most countries in the world. We started seeing recoveries. However, now we're
seeing signs of- there was an initial sharp
rebound, as one would expect. But now, we're seeing
signs of stalling, and particularly when you
look at services sectors. So now let's look at what
the global fiscal response has been. So I think you've
heard this before-- fiscal responses have
been on a scale that hadn't been seen in the past. I think the lessons of the
global financial crisis were learned. This is also a crisis that's
different from previous ones, in the sense that it was viewed
as being completely exogenous. And so that brought about-- there was less concerns
about moral hazard and so on. And so you see a big
increase in spending. So again, you have
the graph that are on the left for
advanced economies, in the middle for emerging
markets and middle-income economies, and
then on the right, for low-income and
developing countries. There is a fair amount of
heterogeneity on how much countries did. But I want to point you to a
couple of very salient pieces on that graph which is circled. So if you look at, for
instance, advanced economies, and you look at the
amount that they have spent in terms
of a fraction of GDP in fiscal support, both
using above-the-line measures and below-the-line measures like
equity loans and guarantees, we're getting close
to combined about 20%. On the other hand, if you look
at middle-income countries, that ratio in emerging-market
and middle-income countries, that is about 6%
or so, or maybe 7%. And if you look at
low-income countries, we're talking about 2% or so. So the difference
in the abilities of the different parts
of the world in terms of using fiscal responses
is just dramatic. I mean, you have the advanced
part of the world that's had the fiscal space, been able to
ramp up spending in a big way, while on the other
hand, emerging markets and particularly low-income
countries really have had their hands-- plus, far more limited in how
much they've been able to do. And this, of course,
is going to affect the strength of the
recovery in emerging markets and low-income countries, unlike
in advanced economies where thanks to the support,
the recoveries are going to be faster. The second point that's
interesting is if you look at-- by the way, the global
economy as a whole, the total amount of fiscal
support has been in terms of above-the-line
support, has been over-- not above the
line-- total support has been over $11
trillion, which is around 12% of global GDP. And again, most of that has
been in advanced economies. A second interesting
difference across these graphs is you see that in
advanced economies, there was equal reliance
on above-the-line and below-the-line measures. But then if you look at, for
instance, low-income countries, they're mostly reliant on
above-the-line measures, much less around equity
loans and guarantees. And so there's a
bit of a switch. Again, this is actually a
fair amount of heterogeneity. There are exceptions
to the rule. for instance, if I look
at emerging markets, India is quite the
exception, which has relied much more on
equity loans and guarantees as opposed to direct spending,
above-the-line spending. But this is, again, a very
interesting difference that you see across
countries in the world. And you can see fiscal support
by type and beneficiary. Again, you have spending
that's been done. There's been health
spending, there's been non-health spending,
equity loans, guarantees, and of course,
fiscal activities, as you can see on
the left graph. And again, health spending
has taken up only, in terms of the
fraction of GDP, is a small number for many
countries in the world. And most of it is non-health
spending and revenues, as you can imagine. And again, you see
the stark difference between low-income countries
and emerging and middle-income countries versus
advanced economies. In terms of the right graph,
you see the distribution of fiscal support
by beneficiary. You can see again, there's
been considerable support provided to households and
to maintain employment, less so to SMEs and
large firms, but still much more substantial
than you would see for lower-income countries. So because of this kind of
support that was provided, especially the
income support that was provided to
households, we've actually seen fairly
robust rebounds in countries like the US
in terms of the recovery. Because if you look
at retail spending, retail spending is now above
what it was before this crisis, and doing quite well. So this kind of
income support really helped preserve
livelihoods, as everybody argued for, and has helped
with bringing about a faster recovery. However, what we
are concerned about, and this is an issue that many
countries are grappling with, is that while this
income support has played a very important role-- I mean, this crisis is
not over, and we still have lots of
restrictions to mobility. There is still no
health solutions, so people, again, are wary of
contact-intensive activities. But this is now
going on for a while. Now, you can see
in the graph, it shows you the duration of
income support measures that are in place and
that have been announced by countries going into 2021. So that goes into March
2021 being the last date. And there are countries where
these income support measures have been extended, so
you see Germany, France, and Italy where it was
extended, for instance, Japan. And there are countries
where those support measures are going to fade out
over the next few months unless there are-- for the policy
packages put in place. And if you look right
at the bottom, where you have the
emerging-market economies, there's a very important
difference there between China as opposed to the others
that you see there. In China, you still have a
lot of support in the system. But if you look at the
other countries in Indonesia and India, income support
has already been phased out. In South Africa, it's
expected to be phased out sometime soon, in October. So these support
measures that were quite crucial to maintaining
livelihoods and bringing back recovery are being phased out. And of course, in
some countries, it's really not even an
option because of the kinds of fiscal constraints
they work under, while in other
countries, of course, there are political issues. So I think looking
forward, one of the factors we have that matter,
obviously, a lot-- what kind of strength of
recovery that we see-- is going to depend upon how
countries respond to this. I mean, the argument
is, of course, that if you have
the fiscal space, you might want to err
on the side of being very cautious in withdrawing any
kind of support at this point. And if you're a country, of
course, that has limited access to financing, then
it just means that the international
community will have to play a bigger role in terms
of concessional financing and concessional aid. So now that some
of the questions that have come up, which
I'm just going to listen. I'm going to talk
through some of them, but these are
questions that I think will be sources of big research
questions going forward in terms of what are
the challenges in terms of fiscal policy going forward. So one of the big questions
that we care about is, how do we minimize the scarring,
the so-called scarring, which is the reduction
to potential output or potential
growth, in countries around the world
from this crisis? So in the beginning
of the crisis, when this was going
back to March, it was completely
obvious what to do, which was to throw
lifelines at everybody-- at households, at firms,
keep households and firms as much as possible,
keep workers and firms as much as possible matched. So we have the short-time
work schemes in Europe. Here you had the PIN
Protection Program. And you keep them
back so that you don't have a big
loss of human capital or organizational capital. And then you help firms
in other ways, too-- loan guarantees and so on. And that made
complete sense when we were thinking about a
few months of a crisis. But then as the
crisis continues, and as has become quite clear
that some sectors will not come back to the
kind of strength, come back to where
they were pre-COVID. And travel is an important one. When do you decide
that this is now the time for workers to
reallocate towards growing sectors as opposed to
artificially keeping them matched with firms
that are in sectors that really don't have great
prospects going forward? So that's one question. And of course, if you think
that we are going to have-- there is a vaccine
around the corner, which of course at this point,
given the number of vaccines that are in trials
and Phase III trials, that there will in all
likelihood be a vaccine. But there is a bigger
question of how effective it will be, how much
of the distribution, how quickly can you
ramp up production and distribution of this in all
different parts of the world? In discussions with many
public health organizations, including the WHO, the
general understanding is that for the acute phase of
this health crisis to be over, one would have to wait
until the end of 2022. And of course, it's
going to vary a lot. There are going to be some
advanced economies that have got these vaccines
much faster than emerging and low-income countries do. But overall, globally, if
you're thinking of an end to the acute phase
of this crisis, it's going to take
a couple of years. And so the question, of
course, for many governments around the world, is how to
deal with the situation, how long to keep extending support. Similarly, there is a question
of preventing mass bankruptcies versus having zombie funds. So if you look at
bankruptcies around the world, while they've risen some,
they are nowhere near the kind of levels you saw
during the global financial crisis. And again, that
reflects the fact that there's been a lot
of support provided, policy support provided,
to prevent bankruptcies. But again, as that
comes off, we know through simulation
exercises that we can have a very substantial
increase in bankruptcy rates in many parts of the world. But then, of course, if you keep
the support system in place, you also then have the risk
of creating zombie firms that are around for much longer and
prevent needed reallocation of resources. I think what's been quite
different about this crisis in terms of the support
measures that have worked is the support
measures that have taken the form of
either outright cash transfers,
unemployment insurance, cash transfers to
firms, effectively, or like the PPE program,
conditional cash transfers in this case. Those have been quite effective. The ones that have
a harder time, they take the form of just
increasing the debt overhang on firms. And so countries
around the world are just trying
to figure out how to make their support to
firms be more equity-like as opposed to debt-like. Another big, major
issue that we grapple with is on how should fiscal
policy play a role in countries where there are very
large informal sectors? And many of our
members have close to 80% of their
population working in the informal sector,
where there's no unemployment insurance. And of course, in
this particular case, direct cash transfers
have played a role. They've been expanded where
cash transfers already existed, and it was being paid
to the digital methods, the generosity and the
scope have been expanded. But there are
countries where it's very hard to reach the people. And they've relied more
on in-kind support. I think going forward, one of
the legacies of this crisis is that people are
going to figure out how to put in place more
stronger social safety nets around the world,
and how to reach people much more quickly. Again, another question is
how to balance between support and incentive to reallocate
to other viable sectors, how to best support SMEs. And of course, the
big question is also of emerging market,
and developing economies, and low-income
countries, and how to deal with that constraint. So let me show you a
left graph over here, which has the data for
low-income countries in terms of what's happened with
their expenditure changes and revenues. And you can see that
there's a whole lot of dots in the bottom left quadrant,
which is a case where they lost revenues quite a bit. And along with that, they've
had to cut back on expenditures. So this is a case where
the standard insurance mechanism doesn't work. They've had to, alongside
cutting loss of revenues, they've had major losses in
expenditures, too, at a time when these expenditures
were needed. And the IMF is
working very closely with countries around the
world to prevent a situation like this. We have about 75
countries for whom we are providing emergency
financing to basically ensure that they're able to maintain
at least their basic spending needs in terms of
health spending and protecting the
most vulnerable and low-income families. Again, on the right graph, what
you see is the debt services, the debt service
through tax revenue, which the leftmost
bars on that are when that debt service to
tax revenue is less than 20%, and the rightmost bar
is when it's over 50%. And what you're basically
seeing is over time, we've seen a shift where
more countries have moved from lower
debt service overhang to high levels of
debt service overhang. So that leads me to my slide
on public debt and living in the times of
high public debt. So this is, again, the
graph that shows you that if you look at the
government debt levels, which is now being projected
to be the highest since-- again-- ever, and in fact,
higher than World War II levels if things continue the
way they are going. And this is true, again,
both for advanced economies and emerging markets. Now the question is,
how will countries deal with these growing debt levels? How big a concern is it? And what would be the
implications of this, for instance for inflation? There's one set of
countries for which we can see an orderly resolution
of the high levels of debt. For one, we know that
interest rates are expected to stay low for very long. And growth is going to
rebound, which one would expect after falling to the abyss. And so that
particular difference, between the interest
payments that they have to make versus the growth-- that would help in terms
of stabilizing debt levels in many countries,
and also in terms of being able to
continue to provide fiscal support without
having to unwind too quickly. And you can see this decline
is the case both for advanced economies and emerging markets. [DOG BARKING] I'm sorry, the dog
has decided to bark. But what you can see here-- [DOG BARKING] I'm sorry, one second, please. When you look at the
right-hand graph, what you see is that central banks have
played a very important role in purchasing government debt. You can see that in
terms of the purchases-- [INAUDIBLE] the central bank got
marketable securities or debt issued since February-- we've seen very large
purchases in the US at 57%, in Japan at 75%. Even in several
emerging markets, we've seen quantitative easing
happening for the first time. And you've seen purchases
of government debt by central banks. So as of now, we are
still in an environment of low interest rates. We're seeing government support
of the fiscal policy stance by buying government debt. It also supports their own
mandate, obviously, firstly, of bringing back
economic activity back to its full employment
level and bringing inflation back up to its target. However, there will
be many countries for which this is no longer a
channel that they can rely on. You have countries that will
face very high interest rates, and growth levels will
not compensate for it. Monetary policies that take
the form of quantitative easing can generate un-anchored
inflation expectations. And so there will
certainly be countries where they will need to
have continuous access to international
institution support in terms of greater liquidity support. But also, we will have
some low-income countries for whom the only
solution will be a restructuring of their debt. And like I said, there are
risks from high public debt. You could have a much more
protracted economic downturn, tightening of
financial conditions. Many of these countries
rely on commodity exports. Commodity market volatility
has been very high. Oil prices are nowhere
near pre-COVID levels. And so this debt burden can
grow for these countries. And again, like I said
many of these countries will need help from the
international community. And let me just end
with the last slide on some of the other
issues that are being put on the plate of fiscal policy. As we come out of
this crisis, when we start having a
durable recovery, there will still be space
for countries, especially those who have fiscal space,
to undertake public investment. Because private
investment is expected to stay low for a while
and interest rates are expected to stay low. So public investment can
play a very important role. And in that case, it would be
very important for countries to invest in green growth. We also know that
growing those sectors tend to be also
quite job intensive, and so it can help
with that, too. Again, going
forward, this crisis is generating an
increase in inequality. All past pandemics
have done that, too, and this one
will be no different. Because we've seen
low-skilled workers being more affected by
this particular crisis, as opposed to
high-skilled workers, we're seeing increases
in inequality. Going forward,
there's also going to be further a
switch to automation, and that can prolong this
increase in inequality. And we have to think about what
the appropriate policies are to bring that down in terms
of reskilling, and so on. And fiscal policy also to
encourage digitalization, in the sense that
this is, I think, where the world is headed. And there are some
countries where you do have the infrastructure for it,
but there are others where you don't. And to ensure, again,
that there is not some big divergence in
prospects for countries, investing in digital
infrastructure would be very beneficial
for many other emerging and developing economies, too. And again, just one last
point on future strategies to bring down debt levels-- so I said one was the fact that
interest rates will stay low, so that helps. But there's also going to
be a need in many countries for raising revenues. There will be
countries where you would need more progressivity
in the tax systems. We certainly need to
accelerate the work being done on making sure
that corporates pay their fair share, that
the digital economy is not completely outside the tax net. And so these measures
will be needed. And there will be
countries where there's wasteful expenditures
that will have to be cut back. But again, this crisis is going
to leave major, major legacies for fiscal policy. And there will be some
countries for which there will be more of a
runway to deal with it, and there will be others
for which there won't be. And so I think
this is a time also for institutions like the
IMF, for us, where we're paying very, very
close attention to all of our memberships
and their need, and making sure that we are
well prepared to address any kind of turbulence
that comes in the future. So with that, I'm going to stop. 