Andra C. Ghent: This paper
came about from talking to delegated investors in
commercial real estate and sitting in on
their conferences. I kept hearing the
same conversation over and over again
which was about certain cities that
they were very focused on and so I started
picking their brain. Why not this city?
Why not that city? I'm picking on Pittsburgh a little bit with the
title of the paper, but in part there's nothing really obviously wrong
with Pittsburgh. It has this beautiful
natural landscape, it's got two world-class
universities, it's a healthcare hub, it's got multiple major
league sports teams, and it's really
well-educated and yet it's really unattractive to
delegated investors. It's 37 out of 39 in the
cities in my sample on the share of commercial
real estate purchases made by delegated investors. It's only about 14 percent of all purchases are
delegated investors. The paper is going to look at this phenomenon more broadly
in a broader set of cities, so it's basically
about this graph. What you see here on the
x-axis is the turnover. This is the percent of the commercial real estate stock that gets sold every year, so it's measured in square feet. On the y-axis is the share of commercial real estate purchases that are made by
delegated investors. You can see that Pittsburgh
is down on the far corner. It's only about two percent of the stock of commercial
real estate in Pittsburgh turns over and again low share of purchases made
by delegated investors. The first thing I want
do in this paper is just to document
this relationship. I'm next going to show you that the delegated investors
actually do have a preference for cities where commercial real estate
turns over more frequently, and then I'm going to use an over-the-counter search model to explain these facts. The explanation in a
nutshell is that in commercial real estate
delegated investors have higher liquidity needs, meaning that they experience more frequent valuation shocks. In the context of
a search model, they get hit with these
valuation shots more frequently than
direct investors. Direct investors are investors that are managing money
on their own behalf, so family offices for example. Empirically, I'm going to show that delegated investors have
shorter holding periods, that's consistent with these
higher liquidity needs. The main reason is likely a principal agent conflict between investors
and their managers. I'm not going to give you
micro foundations for that, I'm just going to assume that, that's why we have this
higher liquidity needs. We're just going
to show that they have shorter holding periods. Knowing this, if you know ex-ante that you have
higher liquidity needs you're going to choose markets that have more
frequent transactions. You're going to want
an exit strategy. One of the things I heard over
and over again was, well, I don't go into cities
like Pittsburgh because I need an exit strategy. You have no exit strategy
in a city like Pittsburgh. If you know you need one
you choose a city like Austin which has actually
a fair bit of turnover, but this actually implies
a lot of path dependence. You get this liquidity begets liquidity effect because even if the cities were identical, at some point in time once you concentrate investors
in one set of cities that means those cities are going to have more
frequent transactions. Why do we care? It's already been brought up that
we know that there's a higher share of capital
going to delegated managers, and what this has
meant is that it's especially prominent in
publicly-traded equities. I expect we're going
to continue to see that the share of
capital managed by delegated investors
is going to continue to go into
publicly-traded equity. You can't rapidly increase allocations to alternatives
because you need a certain concentration of delegated managers
in an asset class for it to be considered an
institutional quality asset. It also may affect urban
design in the sense that delegated investors also differ in the size of
their investments. The main difference
in the type of properties they buy as they
like really large properties consistent with they've
got a whole bunch of capital that they
wanted to deploy and they like to do it on a
$100 million building rather than ten $10
million buildings. This means that you may
actually see differences in what cities develop because of the ability to
attract capital. Finally, I'm going to
be able to quantify a liquidity premium in commercial real estate
using the model. Big caveat on this, I'm sure that Tim is going to tear that apart
because there's a lot of assumptions that go into this but hopefully
it's the first attempt. The data in this
paper comes from Real Capital Analytics. It's transaction-level data on every purchase and sale in commercial real estate in
39 MSAs over 2001-2015. Commercial real estate;
office, industrial, and retail; they also
provide me cap rates. These are dividend yields what we call a dividend yield
in commercial real estate at the MSA level
by property type. The denominator for trade
frequency is going to be the stock of
commercial real estate measured in square feet. This comes from CBRE. CBRE is a broker in
commercial real estate. I wanted to measure
turnover in terms of square feet because it's hard to think about the value
of the stock of commercial real estate
that is not transacting. Raj, can I take your
question at the end? Raj: What is MSA? Andra C. Ghent: Metropolitan
statistical city. You can think of this as a city. That said, if you wanted
to assume that the stock of commercial real estate is worth the average
price per square foot, you get broadly similar results. One of the big advantages of RCA's data is that they've
standardized the buyer name. What that means is I
don't have to worry about Washington Mutual, showing up as Washington
Mutual; WaMu, etc. They've invested a
lot of resources into standardizing
the buyer name. What I'm going to do is
I'm going to classify all buyers for which I see
at least five transactions, that covers about 73 percent of purchases by dollar volume. When you get below
five transactions, it's really hard to
actually see what this buyer truly is. It's probably just an LLC, and it's really hard to
understand who they truly are. I'm just going to
call the rest of buyers small.
Delegated managers. The key distinction
in classifying these, I have a set of sub
classifications of investors but the key distinction is are
you managing your own money or are you managing
somebody else's money? Again, the idea
is that there may be something like
redemption requests, or a maximum holding period, or in the case of PE funds
there's often compensation of the manager contingent upon liquidating the investment. What they don't do if you
have an investment manager, the investors don't usually say, you just sell whenever
you think it's right. Ten years, 20 years, we'll
just leave it up to you. They don't usually
let you do that. so you face some limit on how long you can
hold a property. The benchmark definition
of delegated investors includes PE funds,
investment managers, banks and pension funds. Sometimes the
distinction between PE funds investment
managers is a little gray, but it doesn't really
matter because I put them both into this delegated camp. REITs are in their own category. There's a reason I
call it delegated, not institutional investors. REITs actually have to
hold properties for a minimum four years to be considered a REIT
for tax purposes, and so they actually
have to have long holding periods unlike
other delegated investors. The first thing I
want to show you is the difference between the holding periods of direct
and delegated investors, so the top panel is all
purchases 2001-2015. You don't see a big
difference there, but that's because
most properties are not sold by the
end of the sample. If I can find the analysis
to 2001-2003 purchases, then on average
delegated investors are holding a property
for about two years less. Then at the 50th
percentile you can see that they're actually holding it for about six years less. Unconditionally
without looking at any property characteristics
or where they're investing, delegated investors have
holding periods that are about two years
shorter on average. Now you're probably
thinking this is sensor on both the left and
the right, you're right. Let's run Tobit regressions. The dependent variable here is the holding period
against sensor, both on the left and the right, and I'm regressing it on whether the purchase was made by
a delegated investor. In the first column
the only controls I have are your fixed effects, and you can see that on
average delegated investors hold property for
about 0.6 years less. The next column I'm going to
add buyer size, quintiles, and then a set of controls for which city, property size, the property type,
the property age, and then RCA produces
these quality scores. This is an alternative to, you may have heard the terms A, B, and C class property. The lines are a bit fuzzy, so instead they come up with this gradient of quality;
this continuous measure. Not much difference though, delegated investors are
holding about 0.7 years less. In the third column I split delegated investors
into the sub-components, and you can see that
most of the effect is being driven by
investment managers. By PE funds investment managers, the coefficient is little bit
smaller as well as banks. Not an effect for pension
funds consistent with your priors on pension
funds being long investors. The last column what
I'm doing is I'm only going to look at the set of properties that are sold by the end of the sample because you might be concerned about weird things going on with the censoring on
the right-hand side, and you still see
the same effect. Delegated investors hold
about half a year or less. Getting back to this graph you can think of a whole bunch of stories about what's going on. San Francisco is a big city, San Jose is a big city. Boston is a fairly big city. Maybe it's about size. You can think about
well-educated cities. You can think about a
whole bunch of stories. What I want to do is look at some very obvious explanations
for this relationship. Largest cities maybe
delegated investors only can invest in cities
that are very large, so we can control
for population. The biggest story
I've heard though, is actually about
credit tenants. Delegated investors,
often they say, I need a tenant in the building that is a
publicly traded company. They like these
tenants because they can take it to their
investment board and the cashflows from a
publicly traded company as a lease, it's
just like a bond. If you have Target as a tenant, that's basically Target credit in your cashflows as a landlord. What's a little bit
difficult about this is that most publicly traded
companies have employment in a number of locations other than
at their headquarters. YTS is establishment
level employment data. What I did is I
went and aggregated all the establishment
level employment to the MSA level that was linked
to a publicly traded firm. That's pubempshare. I
also used the assets from Compustat in the headquarters
of firms in that MSA. Then there's a bunch of
economic fundamentals like the share that
are college-educated, diversification
across industries, the overall level of
competition among firms, and then you can just use
MSA level GDP growth. What I'm regressing here,
you should think of this as multivariate
correlations. When we get to the
model, you'll see that these things are
jointly determined. Think of this as multivariate correlations for the time being. I'm regressing delegated share in an MSA on trade frequency, and then a number of controls, including these
economic fundamentals. You can see that
the first column, the only controls here
are your fixed effects. Second column, I
control for population, as well as the publicly
traded share of employment in that MSA and
the economic fundamentals. Third column, I'm using
Compustat assets of firms, publicly traded firms
headquartered in that MSA. Fourth column, I'm using
GDP growth directly, and then the final column, I'm actually instead of using
the share of purchases, I'm using the share
of sales in MSA, in all columns, you can see that trade frequency continues to be highly significant
and college. Delegated investors
seem to prefer to invest in cities that
are more highly educated. Publicly traded employment
doesn't seem to be quite as big a predictor
as I would've expected. The MSA level relationship
between delegated investors share and
trade frequency is jointly determined. To actually see the
delegated investors prefer cities with
higher trade frequency, I want to look at the
transaction level data and I want to look at
within a property, so conditional on a transaction, can I see that the property was more
likely to be purchased by a delegated investor in higher
trade frequencies cities? The key measures of
trade frequency. The first is average trade
frequency in MSA-year. The other one I
want to look at is average trait frequency
and an MSA-property type. The reason I want
to look at this for a lot of investors, they may only invest in industrial property or they may only be in retail property. The relevant market for them
is maybe not a whole MSA, but something within
a property type. I'm going to average across all years because some
of the smaller cities, there's a lot of
volatility year-to-year. Then the third one is the
first half of the sample, the trade frequency in that MSA. This is a super
persistent variable. But you might think that an
investor that's starting to invest in, say, 2008, they may be looking at historical trade frequency to get a sense of how much
liquidity is in that market. What you see here is it does
continue to be the case. It's a little bit less
significant when we look at the transaction
level data, but it continues to be the
case that a purchase is more likely to be made by a delegated investor in these higher trade
frequency cities, even college becomes a little bit less significant
because that might not be a good proxy
for an individual property. Final thing I want to show you about the data is
dividend yield. We call these again cap rates
in commercial real estate. You can see that they are higher in the less
liquid cities. This is consistent with
an illiquidity premium. San Francisco, Austin, San Jose, lower cap rates than Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Salt Lake City, but it's not a big spread. If you look at the axis, the y-axis ranges
from about six, New York City is an outlier for reasons I don't have
time to talk about, up to eight and-a-half percent. We're really talking about
a fairly small spread in dividend yields. This is not even
looking at risks where this is just unadjusted data. You think if anything,
that the fact that Detroit would might
seem a risky city. If anything, you'd
expect that you see more dispersion
in cap rates, but there's a fairly small level of dispersion in cap rates. The explanation, is market segmentation by
liquidity preference. This is a simplified version of the Vayanos and Wang model. We can think of two cities, one and two and their
ex-ante identical. There is a fixed supply of
the asset in each market, and the asset is going to pay one dollar in every period. It's riskless, so there's no
credit risk in this model. Each period a set of
investors is born. It enters the economy. When it's born, the investor values the
asset at its full dividend, one dollar per period, but it doesn't own the asset. It's born valuing the asset,
but it doesn't own it. We call these agents buyers. Buyers randomly meet
sellers at rate Lambda, and investors are randomly going to get shocks at a rate Kappa. That instead of valuing
the asset at one, the dividend at a dollar, if you get hit with
one of these shocks, you value it at a
dollar minus x. They become sellers after they get hit with the shock where you can see right away the buyers, there's a set of
agents out there that value at a dollar. There is a set of agents
that own the asset, the value of the dollar minus x. These people shouldn't be,
but they're heterogeneous. You are born into this economy with Kappa
stamped on your forehead. You know, for example, Raj is born with
cap of four percent and Chester is born with
cap of seven percent. You know ex-ante how frequently you're going to
get these valuation shocks. Knowing that, you have to choose which of
these two markets to search in, you don't get to look in both Austin
and Pittsburgh. You have to choose which of these markets do
you want to look in. Why do you have to choose
between these markets? You can think of this as
an informational cost of learning anything
about the market. It takes a lot of time
to learn something about the fundamentals of
Austin and Pittsburgh. But you don't get to start searching in both markets
and then make a decision, you only search in one. Once an investor has
sold the asset or becomes a low valuation agent that does not own the asset, he exits the economy. This is not the Duffy Garland or Peterson paper where
you're switching back and forth
between high and low. Once you get the hit
with this shock, you're permanently a
low valuation agent. Vayanos and Wang have this
Lemma that shows that there's a unique value of Kappa star, such that all investors with
Kappa above Kappa star, so Kappa star could be
something like six percent. Anybody who has the Kappa above that Kappa star
is going to go to one market and anybody with a Kappa on the other side
goes to the other market. There's also going
to be continuum of symmetric equilibrium
where prices for the assets in both
markets are the same. That's not interesting here. But the other thing to take away is that welfare is actually higher under this
clientele equilibrium. Finally, I want to
calibrate this model, the US commercial
real estate market. What I'm doing here
as I'm going to choose parameters to match volumes and cap rates in the commercial
real estate markets. You can see that what
I've done because in my world I have 39 cities, not two, so I'm going
to split the sample into high and low
turnover markets. Average cap rate and
high turnover markets is 7.51 percent. Average turnover low turnover
markets is 7.74 percent. Much bigger dispersion in turnover across
these two markets. The model matches these
nearly perfectly. That's by design. What is not by design
is the months to sell. In the high turnover market, it takes about nine
months to sell a property once you've
had been hit by a shock. So you should think of this as if I own the property,
I get hit with a shock, how long before I can sell
the property on average, it's about nine months. In the low turnover market, it's about 12 months. The illiquidity
premium is relative to a perfectly liquid asset
with the same credit risk. Two hundred and six basis points in the high turnover market and 228 basis points in
the low turnover market. Just to wrap up the
key facts here. Delegated investors have
shorter holding periods than direct investors. Cities where delegated investors dominate have higher turnover. A model with heterogeneity
investors preferences over liquidity can explain
these city-level facts. The model indicates that the illiquidity premium
for commercial real estate relative to a perfectly
liquid asset with similar credit risk is
about 200 basis points. To get back to the
title of the paper, what's wrong with Pittsburgh? If you're delegated investor, what's wrong with Pittsburgh is that commercial real estate does not trade frequently
enough for you. The broader implication is what makes an asset appropriate for an institutional investor is the concentration of other
institutional investors in that market. Thank you. 