Robert F. Stambaugh: Of
course, mutual funds are very important in institutions. In the US they manage
something like $21 trillion. They hold 25 percent of
the corporate equity. Of the equity funds, about 70 percent of the
AUM is actively managed. Of course, there
are myriad studies that examined fund's performance
returned performance. Our focus in this papers
instead on the behavior and characteristics of mutual
funds, active mutual funds. We think this actually
is a way for getting some novel insights into the
economics of these funds, particularly in terms
of scale diseconomies. Of course, following
Berk and Green 2004, they pointed out
with diseconomies of scale in actively managed
funds in equilibrium, money is basically going to
flow in and out of funds to equilibrate Alphas to 0. But then of course,
if you're trying to look for evidence that such diseconomies exist and
you look for it and returns, you got this inherent challenge if the expected performance
or the Alpha's 0, then trying to link
performance to scale faces that
inherent challenge. Now, some studies
have surmounted that challenge and looked at evidence that
deals with returns, including some early
work that we've done. But we think actually looking
at fun characteristics and the trade-offs
among them provides very strong evidence
of scale diseconomies. Then that sense gives us a really valuable
source of insights into the economics
of mutual funds. So our main contributions
here is first one, an equilibrium model
that's going to link key fund characteristics. These characteristics include
the size of the fund, funds expense ratio or think
of it as it's fee rate, the funds turnover, and also the liquidity of the
funds portfolio. We find strong
empirical evidence of implied trade-offs among these characteristics
that are consistent with the scale diseconomies. One of these
characteristics, I mentioned the liquidity of the funds
portfolio, but we introduced, this is a new characteristic
that as we introduce a measure that characterizes the funds portfolio,
portfolio liquidity. We showed that you actually
take this measure that we derive from first principles
of trading costs. You can decompose it into
the average liquidity, the stocks held, as well as the diversification
of the portfolio. That second dimension is rather
key because if you think about how liquid a portfolio is, liquidity of the stuff in the portfolio is one
dimension of that, but it's not the whole story. Just think of having a portfolio where all the money's in one stock and what it would cost you to trade, let's say, one percent
of that portfolio versus a portfolio we've
got a 100 stocks and you want to trade one
percent of that portfolio. You've been trading a
much smaller amount of each stock in the latter case. So we think that makes sense to think of that portfolio is more liquid in that second case. In fact, the diversification of the portfolio simply also
has something to say about. We have a new
diversification measure, which we can also show
decomposes into two components. The coverage of the portfolio, how many stocks are being held, versus the total
number of stocks that the firm could hold
in a benchmark. Then second, what
we call balanced. These are the weights on however many stocks
of portfolio has, how close to those weights resemble a market
cap of weights. We also introduced a new
measure of fund activeness that combines the
portfolio liquidity, which is going to reflect the
holdings of the portfolio. But also how much the
funds turns over, which is a novel measure, dimension of activeness relative to some existing measures. We also rethink this
notion of scale. Scale is traditionally thought of as the size of the fund. What we argue is it, should we think of scale is
combining that fund size, width, how active
the fund is managed, its turnover and its liquidity. We get a number of
implied trade-offs among the characteristics
of the fund. First of all, we show that in our model we get an application
that a smaller fund, higher fee, and lower
turnover should all lead to a less
liquid portfolio. We find that in the data. Also, if you take those, those first three
characteristics and also add to them a less
diversified portfolio, that should imply that
the fund will be holding more liquid stocks and
we find that as well. Controlling for
those above things, if you also add in
lower coverage, lower coverage should
imply a higher balance. That's all trade-off between
those two dimensions of diversification that we
do find that data as well. Also a smaller fund and a fund that charges
a higher fee or a higher expense
ratio should also display greater activists
and we find that as well. Finally, smaller funds should be actually
more expensive, charge higher fee rates. We also find that in the data. These are all things that
basically come out of a model that rests on there being
the scale diseconomies. Of course, our paper relates this to literature
a number of dimensions, although are focused
on characteristics. We think it's actually
fairly novel. There are some familiar
concepts, of course. Foremost among these
would be the literature on decreasing returns to scale, which I mentioned earlier. That literature by enlarge relates performance
to fund size. We instead look at
fund side related to other multiple
characteristics and in this set of joint trade-offs. Also there's a
longstanding literature on portfolio diversification
that's proposed measures that include
both numbers, stocks, as well as the
concentration of weights and our diversification
measure blends both of those ideas from the literature. Let me talk a little bit about this portfolio liquidity measure because that's the
characteristic of a fund, that's sort of novel
here that we introduce. The basic ideas here
is pretty simple. A portfolio is more liquid if it's less costly
to trade a fraction of it. The perspective we
take here and thinking about liquidity of a portfolio. Think of a portfolio
as an asset. If we think about
liquidity of an asset, we generally associate
lower liquidity with higher cost of trading. If we think of a portfolio
in the same way, then we can think of a trading cost approach to thinking about what
liquidity would look like. Liquidity measure we end up with looks like
this thing here that depends on the number
of stocks in the portfolio, the portfolios weights
on each stock, and the weight that each stock gets an evaluated benchmark, that would be the
funds benchmark. That measure lies between zero and one. Of course, the least liquid
portfolio is going to be a portfolio the holds
that single, smallest, least liquid stock
and the benchmark and the most liquid
portfolio is going to be the benchmark portfolio itself. We have a liquidity of one. How does this measure arise? Well, we start with a
barely simple assumption that larger trades have
higher proportional cost. In other words, the
more of a stocks outstanding market
cap you trade, the higher the proportional cost of trading that's going to be. We just pause it that as a simple proportional
relation here, where you have this c, and we assume that c
is going to be the same for all the stocks in
the portfolios benchmark. If you have, for example, a fund with a small cap growth
benchmark are going to assume that c parameter is the same for all the
small-cap growth funds. The idea is that
c then multiplies the dollar amounts
you're trading as a fraction of the stocks
outstanding market cap. As I say, the greater
the fraction of the market cap you're trading, the higher your trading costs per dollar of stock traded. If you now think of the
portfolio as an asset, you are going to trade
and you're going to trade D as the total
dollar amount traded, the dollar amount
traded in each stock, and it's going to be D times wi the weight in stock
i in the portfolio. If you just substitute
to get the total cost of trading stock summed up
as the cost per stock, and the cost per
stock just follows this relation I
put up initially. Then you can see that you can rewrite things such
that this thing I defined as L pops out here as the liquidity measure that
enters the trading costs. Basically the liquidity
measure we derive here relates
directly to thinking about trading the
portfolio as an asset. Now we've taken that
liquidity characteristic and included in a model where we take a given active funds
trading costs and we allowed to depend fairly arbitrarily
on three things. The size of the fund, how much the fund turns over, and how liquid is the
fund's portfolio without the exponents on those things to be fairly general, basically, it seemed that the Gamma, Lambda, and are all positive. There's some skill the fund has, we call it mu, and
then this function g, but that depends on
turnover and liquidity represents how actively the
fund applies that skill. We can be fairly
general about that in our basic model, the g function, we're going to assume the fund maximizes its fee revenue, which is its fee
rate, times it's AUM. We're going to impose the
simple Berk Green equilibrium. The fund is facing
decrease returns to scale here imposed by this
trading cost function. The Berk Green argument
will apply here. It's just that an
equilibrium money is going to move around. Investors will allocate
to each fund to make the expected Alpha
zero in equilibrium. That's then going to
apply the fee revenue, which we denote here
by F we going to be given by this function
of the turnover, the liquidity, and the fee rate, given the fund scale mu. If we simply take our
first-order condition with respect to the fee rate, we basically get this empirical
trade-off are going to investigate that relates
this new characteristic, this portfolio liquidity
to the size to fund, a fee rate or expense
ratio f and turnover t and the b_0 through b_3 in that equation are all
going to be positive. In particular that they don't depend on the funds
specific skill that drops out here are
the first-order condition. We're going to look at
evidence here based on nearly 2800 active
US mutual funds, from 79 to 2014, we build on some earlier
work we've done here and constructing a database
that combines CRSP, Morningstar and
Reuters in this case. To get also the
holdings are required. We exclude index funds, not equity, non-equity funds, international funds,
industry funds, target date funds,
fund of funds, fungicides less than 15 million. These are basically more or less plain vanilla active
equity mutual funds. We're going to run a panel
regression where we put the log liquidity on the
left and then the fund size, fee rate, and turnover
on the right. We're going to add to
this regression sector core fixed effects. That is effectively
treats this as a cross-sectional relation that we're looking at holding
at a given point in time. One of the things that the sector quarter fixed
effect does is we can basically treat the L
liquidity measure as being defined with respect to a sector-specific benchmark. If you took our
liquidity measure defined with respect and
overall market benchmark, to get it divided with respect to a sector-specific benchmark, you would just have to
multiply that thing by the ratio of the sector AUM to market AUM and the fixed
effect and the regression basically allows that
multiplication to occur. The c we treat as constant
within a given sector in quarter or another
we treat this model is a cross-sectional model. In principle, you could
also apply the time series except that we don't
do that primarily because this c we think
is likely to vary non-trivially over time as liquidity conditions
in the market. I've done some early
work of Lu Bush on time varying
liquidity in the market. We don't think it's
a constant thing. But we do think it makes
sense to think of this as a cross sectional
implication. Then we clustered by funds
and getting standard errors. Then it's regression we
expect that the a_1, the coefficient on log size of the fund should be positive. Coefficient on the
expense ratio should be negative and the coefficient on turnover should be positive. Indeed, that's what we find
rather strongly in the data. You can see in the fourth column or the multiple
regression that puts all three in it wants where the dependent variable
is the log liquidity. You can see we get
very strongly fun size entering positively, the expense ratio negatively
and turnover positively. This liquidity
measure that I showed you earlier how we get it. You can take it and
actually decompose it into products of some stuff. If you stare at those things
and try to give them names. It looks to us like one of these components we can call stock
liquidity is basically just the simple
arithmetic average of each stock's size is market cap relative to the average market cap of
stocks and the benchmark. Now, of course, there
are many measures of stock-specific liquidity. Market cap is a fairly
popular and effective one. We call that first
thing stock liquidity. Then the second thing looks
like to us diversification. In fact, the
diversification component, we can actually break up as
a product of two components that represent both the
coverage and the balance. That first ratio, N over N_M, is effectively just a
function of the number of stocks in the portfolio versus
those in the benchmark. That second thing there in the square brackets, the 1 plus, that variance term, basically, this measures how close the weights are to
market cap weight. We can actually take
the diversification measure and write it as a product of the portfolio's
coverage times its balance, and both of those measures
are between 0 and 1. That allows us to look at
some additional trade-offs. Well, before I get
to that, let me just show you a little
bit of history. Liquidity over time
has more than doubled for active equity mutual funds have gotten much more liquid. Primarily because diversification
has nearly tripled. The stock liquidity actually
went up and then back down. It's not had a great trend, but the diversification has
trended sharply upward, certainly since the
Internet bubble. Both components of
diversification, both balance and coverage
have both trended up sharply. This is a pretty well
understood trend toward closet indexing. I think these plots show
it pretty dramatically. In fact, the coverage
has gone up. The number of friends are
holding more stocks despite the fact that the number
of stocks in the market, publicly traded
stocks in the market has gone down pretty sharply since the late '90s around
the Internet bubble. As I said, we can get to
actually other trade-offs. We can look at these components
of portfolio liquidity. For example, if we regress diversification on those first three characteristics
plus stock liquidity, we should get a strongly
negative coefficient on stock liquidity. Of course, the other
coefficients as we got earlier. In fact, we do that. If you add balance to that equation on
the right-hand side and regress coverage, you should get a negative
coefficient on balance. We do and reversing things, put balance on the left
and coverage on the right, this one got
negative when we do. Finally, if you put stock
liquidity on the left, put diversification and the other three
characteristics on the right, you should get a negative
coefficient on stock, on diversification and we do. All these trade-offs among
the various components of liquidity also emerge
pretty strongly in the data. I mentioned fund activeness. If you think of this skill
times this activeness, it depends on both
turnover and liquidity, we should think of
that as something that also should relate to
other characteristics of the fund and particularly with decrease returns to scale. We should find that the
funds that are more expensive of a
higher fee rate and our smaller should
be more active. This activeness just measured by the way that we define here, if I just back up a bit, this activeness measure
is just a simple product. The T times L, the minus half is a special case of a more general
version of activeness. If you write activeness
it's just a product of T times L each raised
to some power. The powers have to obey a
restriction in order for that to be a solution to the first-order
conditions for T, L, and F and a special
case of that restrictions. In fact, this is
one of the simplest case that goes back to the way we actually wrote our derivation
of liquidity measure. We just have this activeness measured be T times
L minus half. Basically embeds
both turnover and liquidity and how actively the fund is managing its money. We find that indeed
as predicted, the funds that are smaller
and charge higher fee rates, which, of course, other things equal
will tend to make them smaller, are more active. These trade-offs come
through very strongly as well in the data. Then finally, a lot of these trade-offs come
through very strongly, even in simple correlations. If you think, for example, about that relates to these funds size
and expense ratio, just even going back to the simple intuition
in Berk and Green. All other things equal, if you charge a high fee rate, you're going to have less AUM. We find that emerges very
strongly in the data. In fact, here I'm showing
you both cross-sectional and simple time
series correlations. You get strong relations. Both dimensions for the
larger funds are cheaper. Also funds that trade less
are both larger and cheaper. As again, this simple intuition about scale
of these economies. Finally, funds with
more liquid portfolios are also larger and cheaper. Maybe just, I'll finish up
with a couple of plots here. One is to show you some cross-sectional
correlations and how they plot over time. These things are so strong that basically the signs never flip. This is just plotting
here quarter by quarter. The cross-sectional
correlations of portfolio liquidity with
fungicides turnover, the expense ratio, portfolio liquidity
of the expense ratio, font size with expense ratio. These things have not only
their predicted signs overall but at every period
of the sample. Fidelity Magellan was the world's largest active
equity mutual fund. Maybe the largest mutual
fund right around the turn of the millennium at the height of the
Internet bubble. Peter Lynch had this long
spectacular record that basically generated
huge growth in the AUM. Since the turn of
the millennium, the AUM has dropped
considerably. What our story would suggest is, as the AUM grew substantially, they would have to manage
the more liquid portfolio. Indeed, if you look at our
portfolio liquidity measure, you can see how closely it
tracks with the Magellan AUM. Again, it's a very
simple idea in the paper that these characteristics
of funds and the trade-offs among
them are basically strong evidence staring you in the face about scale
of these economies. Just to conclude here, let me just review the
strong relations we get are that smaller funds, higher fees, lower turnover implied less liquid portfolio. Those three things plus
less diversification apply more liquid stocks. Lower coverage controlling for the other things will
imply higher balance, smaller funds, higher fees imply higher effectiveness and smaller funds imply higher fees. We find all those in the data. Then in addition, and we think this concept of
portfolio liquidity, we think is a novel thing, we don't know of any
other measure of portfolio liquidity out there. We're hoping to do more and
thinking about that as well. 