Ian Appel: Now,
there's obviously a huge literature
out there looking at how institutional investors influence firm-level
governance. A big chunk of this literature
focuses on activists who specifically buy shares with the intention of
influencing management. Now, other papers, including
a recent paper I have with Todd and Don look at the
role of passive investors. Now, this paper is
different in that we specifically want to consider the interaction between these two different types
of institutional investors. Now, to see why we're
interested in looking at this, I'll start out by
pointing out that we are in many respects
in the midst of two major changes to the nature of institutional
ownership in the US. First off, activism
has gone mainstream. There's hundreds of activist
campaigns every year, and The Economist refers to their current scale as
being unprecedented. Meanwhile, these campaigns
are in many respects, becoming more
ambitious, that is, it's more likely that activists seek board representation, and according to an article
in The Wall Street Journal last year, this is working. We're seeing more and
more activist campaigns that end with the activist
getting a seat on the board. Now, the second major change is the rise of passive investors. In this figure, we're
plotting the percentage of equity mutual fund assets
that are passively managed. We see that this has gone from
under 10 percent in 1998, all the way up to over
30 percent by 2014. In fact, just last year, Vanguard had net inflows of nearly a quarter of
a trillion dollars, suggesting that this
trend may not be slowing down anytime soon. What do we ask in this paper? Well, ultimately,
we want to know whether these two
trends are related. Specifically, we're interested
in looking at whether passive ownership affects the goals of activist campaigns. These goals can be gaining
board representation, they may be a policy change like increasing payouts
to shareholders. We also want to look at whether passive ownership affects the tactics of
activist investors. These tactics run the
full range from having a friendly conversation
with management all the way to the nuclear
option of launching a proxy fight and trying to initiate a change in
corporate control. Finally, we want to look at
whether passive ownership affects the outcomes
of activist campaigns. That is, does it make
it more likely that activists achieve
their stated goal? Now, we can certainly
think of reasons why passive investors potentially
facilitate activism. Activists face a classic
free-rider problem in which they bear all the costs associated with an intervention, yet the benefits accrue
across all shareholders. It could be that, while
the large block holdings of these passive
investors will reduce coordination costs for
activists and ultimately make it cheaper to launch
an activism campaign. In addition, it could be that
support for campaigns may increase the expected
benefits of activism. For instance, if an
activist is able to gain the support of just one or two of these large
passive investors, this potentially lends
credibility to a campaign and ultimately increases the
chances that it will succeed. We see anecdotal
evidence that both of these channels
potentially operate here. For instance, the hedge fund ValueAct was able to
gain a board seat at Microsoft when they own less than one percent
of all its shares. Now, they didn't go to Microsoft and initiate a proxy fight here, they simply approached
management with demands. Now, the reason
Microsoft was willing to give ValueAct a board
seat was because they realized that those
demands were backed by a number of the large mutual funds
that own Microsoft stock. In fact, there's
anecdotal evidence that activists
oftentimes approach mutual funds prior to initiating their campaigns
in order to gauge the level of support
they'll be receiving. Now, interestingly, this
communication can go both ways. Bill Ackman talks about how he's oftentimes approached
by mutual funds, making what he calls an RFA, or a request for activism. One commentator says that, "This is the biggest
shift in the battle for corporate control
since private equity was invented in the 1980s, activists realize
they can influence the concentrated shareholder
base at many companies, and they're tapping
into the desires of shareholders to see
change take place." Now, we can also think
about reasons why passive ownership
may not have much of an effect on activism. For instance, some people
have the opinion that, well, these index funds
just typically take little interest in
how firms are run. In fact, this cover
article from The Economist last year referred to index funds as being
lazy investors. Furthermore, there's potential
conflicts of interest. In Bill Ackman's letter to
investors earlier this year, he pointed out that one of the biggest pools of money going into index funds comes from
corporate pension funds. It may not help these
index funds raise money from corporate
America if they have a reputation for taking on management and
supporting activists. Finally, as long-term
investors, in some sense, passive investors are the longest of long-term investors, they may not be interested in supporting
shortsighted activists. Larry Fink, in particular, has waged a war
on short-termism. He argues that many of
the things being done by activists don't really benefit
firms in the long run. Now, ultimately
answering this question poses a bit of an
empirical challenge. Specifically, it could be that passive ownership
is correlated with factors that directly affect activists' tactics
and success rates. For instance,
membership in the S&P 500 drives a lot of
passive ownership, yet this index excludes
less liquid stocks. In addition, it
could be things like past performance that affect index inclusion and also have an effect on the outcomes we're interested in studying here. Our identification strategy for this paper involves
using variation in passive ownership that stems
from the cutoff between the Russell 1000 index and
the Russell 2000 index. Specifically, the way
these indexes are constructed is that each June, Russell ranks the
top 3,000 stocks according to their end-of-May
market capitalization. It then chops off
the first 1,000 stocks and calls
that the Russell 1000 and takes the next 2,000 stocks and calls
that the Russell 2000. Now, I will point
out that there is one exception to this rule. Russell implemented
what's called a banding policy in order to reduce the number of
stocks that are jumping back and forth
between the indexes. I won't get into the details
here, they're in the paper. But I will say that
this is something that we explicitly control for in our regression
specification. Now, the important
idea here, however, is that these indexes
are valuated, and so the portfolio
weights are going to vary considerably around
the threshold between the two indexes. We see that in the
following figure. In the first panel here, we're plotting the portfolio
weights for the bottom 500 firms in the
Russell 1000 index, and in the second panel, we see the portfolio
weights for the top 500 in the Russell 2000 index. There's a large jump in these portfolio weights for stocks at the top of
the Russell 2000, they're about an order of
magnitude larger here. Now, it turns out there's
a similar amount of assets tracking both
of these indexes, and so we end up
getting a large jump in passive ownership for
stocks at the top of the Russell 2000
relative to those at the bottom of
the Russell 1000. It's about a 60 percent jump and we'll take a closer look at this in a regression specification
in just a few slides. Ultimately, what we're going
to do is we're going to use this as an
instrumental variable. Specifically, we
restrict our sample to stocks near the threshold
between the two indexes, and then we robustly
control for factors that determine which index
a stock gets put into. We then use an indicator
for assignment to the Russell 2000 as an instrument for passive
institutional ownership. What's our key identification
assumption here? Well, this is just the
exclusion restriction, which says that
after we condition on the index determinants, inclusion in the Russell
2000 does not directly affect the activism outcomes we're interested in studying. Just a few words on the
data we're using here. Our activism data comes
from Shark Watch, which creates a database using both company
and activist filings, as well as press releases
and news publications. These sample consists
of activism events for stocks within 500 ranks of the cutoffs between
the two indexes. Our sample runs from
2008 through 2014. This gives us a total of 426 activism events
against 282 unique firms. We get mutual fund ownership
data using S12 filings. Then we'll use the fund names
and CRSP identifiers in order to classify funds into
one of three categories. First, we have the
passive funds. These are funds where the
fund name either includes a keyword like index or Russell. Then we also use a CRSP mutual fund database
classification for index funds. Active funds are all other
funds that we can match to fund names in the CRSP
mutual fund database. Then unclassified funds are
those that can't be matched. We can take all these fund
types and regress them on an indicator for
inclusion in the Russell 2000 and all of our
control variables. If we look at all
mutual fund ownership, we see that there's
a positive effect, but it's not statistically
significant. However, if we break down this mutual fund ownership
into the three types, passive, active,
and unclassified, we see that there's a strong and statistically
significant effect for passive ownership when a fund is included in the top
of the Russell 2000. Now importantly,
we don't pick up an effect for other
types of mutual funds, suggesting that more
active investors aren't responding
to whether or not a stock is classified into the Russell 1000 or
the Russell 2000. We'll jump into the results. We're first interested in studying whether or
not passive ownership influences the type of
campaigns pursued by activists. Shark Watch classifies
campaigns into three types. The first type are campaigns that seek board representation. The second type are
those that seek a policy change thought
to enhance value. These can be things like
increasing payouts to shareholders or changing the capital
structure of the firm. Then finally, we have
this other category which includes things like
shareholder proposals, exempt solicitations, and 13D filings with no specific
activist intent stated. We can roughly think
about these as being in descending order of how
ambitious they are. We start out by regressing
these three types of campaigns onto our passive
ownership measure. Then remember we instrument
for passive ownership using an indicator for
assignment to the Russell 2000. We see that there's
an increase in campaigns seeking
board representation. Now just to help you
interpret these coefficients, we're scaling everything by
standard deviations here. This is a standard
deviation change for a one standard deviation
change in passive ownership. We see that there's a positive
effect across the board, significant at at least
the five percent level. Now to help you think about the economic magnitudes here, this is pretty big. It corresponds to a doubling in the share of campaigns seeking board representation
when we have this one standard deviation
change in passive ownership. Now, this is offset to an extent by a decrease in other
types of campaigns. Specifically, we see a
negative coefficient. They're not significant
for campaigns that are seeking
some policy change. Then we have a
negative coefficient on these other campaigns. A natural question is, well, why do we see more
of these campaigns seeking board representation for the dissident shareholder? Well, an answer for
this is the fact that passive
ownership potentially facilitates proxy
battles by reducing the cost that will be
faced by the activists. Proxy fights are a common tactic for activist campaigns
seeking board representation. An important feature about proxy fights is that they
can be really expensive. Gantcher estimates the total average cost a greater
than $10 million. This includes direct costs, things like hiring attorneys, or PR firms, or proxy solicitation services, and then also indirect
costs, things like effort. Yet these costs
may be reduced by the large blocks of
passive investors. At a minimum, it makes it easier to gauge the
support you're going to be receiving from the
shareholder base prior to initiating
a proxy fight. We see evidence of this. Here we're looking at campaigns that feature a proxy fight. Again, we see that as we
have more passive ownership, there's an increase
in proxy fights. Again, the economic magnitude
here is quite large. We see that a one standard
deviation increase in passive ownership is associated with a 135 percent
increase in proxy fights. Now, interestingly, these
proxy fights aren't necessarily just an activist trying to get a single
seat on the board. We do see an increase in activists nominating
a short slate, which is a minority
of the board. Yet we also see some evidence of an increase of
activists nominating a full slate of directors in order to replace
the entire board. If we look at the outcomes
of these proxy fights, we end up seeing that there's
more proxy settlements. Specifically we see that a one standard deviation
increase in passive ownership is associated with a 0.7 to 0.9 increase in the
likelihood of a settlement. Now we don't see however, any change in whether
the activist wins a proxy fight or whether the
firm wins a proxy fight. This is consistent
with the idea that if a proxy fight is close, if management thinks that the dissident has a
chance of winning, well, they're going to
do their best to try to settle. They don't want to lose. Now I'll briefly go over some other results we look at in terms of other
outcomes of activism. It turned out we
don't find any impact on the likelihood of things
like dividend increases, capital structure
changes, or spinoffs. This is potentially consistent with what we were talking
about with Larry Fink before where many
passive investors aren't really interested in supporting campaigns
that they think might be having and might
have short-term goals. However, we do document an impact on corporate
control outcomes. Specifically, we
see that it's more likely that a
target is acquired. In addition, we
see that it's more likely that takeover
defenses are removed. These can be things
like poison pills or staggered boards. We also look at
other tactics that activists can potentially use. We don't see any
significant impact on less costly tactics. These are things like nonbinding shareholder proposals or
letters to shareholders. It doesn't appear that
passive ownership affects these tactics that
can be used by activists. However, we do see an effect on other types of
expensive tactics. Before we said that, well, there's an increase
in proxy fights, which are quite expensive. In addition, we see that there's an increase in hostile offers, which of course can also
be expensive as well. On another note. We also don't document any change in the choice
of activist targets. Specifically, passive
ownership isn't associated with a change
in the likelihood of a firm being targeted by an activist nor is it
associated with differences in ex ante characteristics
of targeted firms. We don't see any difference
in previous years profitability or investment
rates for firms that are targeted by activism based on this measure of
passive ownership. I'll wrap up. In the
last several years, we've obviously seen
a dramatic increase in passive ownership. The shifting nature of the
US stock market likely affects investor's ability
to discipline managers. This paper indicates that increased passive
ownership appears to facilitate activism by
other types of investors. The findings
ultimately highlight the potential
importance of costs associated with
undertaking proxy fights and other types of intervention. Ultimately they shed light on the determinants
of activist goals, tactics, and eventual outcomes. 