Jim Carrey: There are many
issues to think about. There's the whole
economic growth aspect. There's long-run issues
potentially on fertility. There are issues obviously on mortality and on the health
status of the population. There are issues that involve the labor market
and thinking about both labor market participation, wage patterns, and how all of
those things may influence the way in which
people interact with the social security system and potentially the DAI
system as well. The piece of this very
complicated puzzle that we've chosen
to focus on today, is the labor market component. I am delighted that
we have Steve Goss, the Chief actuary at
SSA, and Karen Glenn, The Deputy Chief
Actuary with us today. The way this will work
is they're going to start by saying a
little bit about the broad overview
and how some of the COVID-19 aspects fit into, thinking about social security. Then we have three
leading labor economists. We're going to be able
to talk about some of the implications of COVID-19
for the labor market. Katharine Abraham from
University of Maryland, also the former
commissioner of the BLS, and one of our nation's
leading labor market experts is going to think about some of the aspects around
participation. Michael Stepner, who is at the University of Toronto and
is one of the people who's associated with the
opportunity insights team at Harvard that was producing nearly real-time estimates
of what was happening in the labor market during the early months of the pandemic, is going to share
some of the lessons on what we've seen in terms of different groups
in the labor market. Till von Wachter at UCLA, who is part of the
California Policy Lab and was doing a fantastic job of managing to bring together different administrative
datasets to track the consequences
of the pandemic, including very importantly for the labor market in California, will then share some insights
on some of the aspects of the labor market
that he was able to observe in all of this. We will then circle back
and let Karen and Steve wrap up based on what we've heard about the labor market and some of
their thinking. Then we'll open up for some general commentary
as we go along. With that, I'm going to turn, I think Steve, you're going
to be the opening speaker. Steve Goss: Great. Thank
you very much, Jim Carrey. I think I'm up to one
or two slides forward. I think Karen has control. First of all, just
a tiny little bit on the COVID background, all of this should be familiar. I think last year,
we talked about the three waves back in 1918 for the so-called
Spanish flu. Of course, we have a
little picture here from last Saturday of information CDC had through Friday of last week. You can see unfortunately that much as many
and all had hoped, we were going to be done
with this on behold, we are in to end a summer
research on this here. You will see in fact that on Thursday and
Friday of last week, The Daily reported
infections to CDC. In fact, a new backup
above the 50,000 level, which is unfortunate, and we
can see that the deaths are also moving back
towards trending up. We are into another wave now. Just how long and how large it's going to
be is yet to be seen. Of course, we're not even into the fall and winter coming. This really just by
way of saying that, labor market
implications officer, upon what the pandemic is doing, our labor market has obviously changed a lot since the
biggest lock downs. But the question is, what's going to be facing
this going forward? On the next slide, just want to share with
you a little bit about what we've been doing since the last time in
the summer Session. Some might recall the
2020 trustees report. I see several people on here in addition to Karen and myself who were much
involved in it. Did not reflect the pandemic. There's just not time to
put together a solid sense of what the sense of the
pandemic was going to be on the economy,
on Social Security. What chief actuary did in
SSA back in November 24, if I'm recalling the right date, we did put together something that was
published on the web at that time was based largely on work that we had
done back in September. Talking with a lot
of epidemiologists and others and economists
about what was going on and the impressions
of what was happening in the economy and health sector, did take our best
shot at that time of putting together some
numbers, that was really done at the behest of
our auditor's from the last Trustees Report, 2020. We put together what
is a subsequent event, that wouldn't be affected
by the pandemic and the ensuing recession were what our best expectations
were at the time. I think we'll be going
through a little bit of that. Karen will describe a
little bit of that in here. Of course, what the expected
effects are going forward. Obviously, the effects have
been dramatic in many ways. The labor market is
especially interesting and that's why we're
so interested in hearing a feedback
from all of you. By the way, so great
to see all your faces. This is really nice. I think I'm past with the time now and
the next slide to Karen. Karen Glenn: Thank you,
Steve. Thank you, Jim, for inviting us to
speak again today. As Steve mentioned, we did
an update in the fall of 2020 to try to bring in the effects of COVID
on Social Security. We're going to go through
a little bit of what was our thinking at the time and
what is our thinking now. Obviously, a few months have
gone by since fall of 2020. You can see that our thinking, will have evolved on
any of these topics. First just in general, our thinking back involved 2020, was that over this 75-year-old
long-range period, the effects of COVID in the ensuing recession would
likely be pretty minor. Or that we would be
largely recovered by 2023 with little
permanent effect. One thing to note is the
trustees reports have generally incorporated the likelihood
periodic negative events, not specifically
pandemics, but just the idea that every once in a while something
bad will happen. One example is on death rates. We have generally assumed
in annual improvement in death rates of about 0.73
percent a year on average. Other forecasters have
persistently assumed improvement of about one percent or
higher, with no deceleration. You can see that on average, we've built in the likelihood
of things not going well. Similarly, unemployment rates, trustees reports have
typically assumed unemployment rates in the
long run a little bit higher on average than
most other forecasters. Again, just reflecting the fact that over the long run you're going to have these cycles and some of them
would be negative. In the near term, no clearly, COVID has many near-term
considerations and we'll go through
a few of those now. One thing to keep
in mind is that the 2021 trustees report
has not yet been released. Stay tuned over
the next few weeks or where we actually
stand on that. This graph, not very extensive. Hopefully, it's pretty clear. What this shows is
when the reserves of the combined OASDI Trust
funds will go to zero. The dark blue solid
line is where we were at the time of
2020 trustees report. At that time, we were assuming, or we were projecting that the trust funds would
become depleted in 2035. With this updated baseline
that shifted back to 2034, and I'm not going to get into the details on the
individual trust funds. OASDI is made up of OASI and DI, and there were different
effects on the two of those. Again, stay tuned for what we project in the 2021
trustee report. Getting into a little
bit more detail on the specific factors, we know demographic factors aren't the focus of
today's presentations, but we wanted to just give
you a really quick overview of our thinking and some of
the more important things. Mortality. Back in fall 2020, we were assuming that
there would only be a modest fall wave. We were assuming that overall mortality rates
for the full year 2020, would be about 12
percent higher than we would have assumed in the
absence of the pandemic. That translates into about 350,000 excess deaths per year. Those of you who follow
this statistics carefully, or not even all that carefully, I think it was pretty much
out there in the news. We ended up doing
much worse than that. The fall wave was significant, the winter wave was even more significant going into 2021. We believe excess deaths
ended up at about 500,000, depending exactly on
how you measure that. We were underestimating
[inaudible]. Similarly, we assumed
increases for 2021 and 2022 of about six
percent and two percent. At least 2021 ended
up significantly too. It's looking like that
will be more like 16 percent or 15 percent, more like 2020, just because things were so bad in late winter or early spring. As Steve was pointing
out in his graph, things maybe turning up again. Hopefully, that's
mainly just his counts and not so much on deaths, but I think that's really
still to be determined. Going forward from mortality, just a few factors we're
still thinking about. Will the increases in death
rates continued to be similar across all adults ages? Are there significantly
more deaths at older ages? The death rates at almost all adults ages
are pretty similar, not much of a gradient there. One thing that I think was on last slide that
I did not really mention is that for younger
folks below about age 15, death rates actually went
down during the pandemic. Possibly due to less
risky behavior, just not being out in
the world as much. But anyway, there was a differential between
those two age groups. Longer-term, will there be persistent effects on mortality? Obviously, there's
the direct virus related immediate deaths. There are some indirect
deaths due to deferred care. There were also some
increased deaths of despair or violence, increased suicides and
homicides during the pandemic. Then really the long-term
related to mortality is, will there be decreased
life expectancy in the future for those folks
who were infected by COVID? Long COVID is getting lots
of attention right now. What will really be the
long term effects of that? Last bullet here, data available to date in the medical implications
are still unclear. We're still trying
to learn all we can. On the fertility
side, really quickly. We did assume that the pandemic
would affect birth rates in years 2021 through 2025. We assumed lower birth
rates in 2021 and '22. But then a full makeup
over the next few years. Before returning to where
we would have been in 2026. Really, this just reflects and assumed deferral of births, not a decrease in
number of births. What do we know now? Unfortunately, not too much
more just because there's obviously a nine month in delay in the time from
conception to births. We do have a little bit of state data from the
beginning of 2021. Birth rates are very low. Whether they're actually
lower than what we assumed, not quite clear yet. Will there be a makeup? That's still to be determined. Moving on to a couple of economic facts, which I know you folks will be interested in. Direct GDP effects. This graph has a lot going on, but let me orient you. This is real GDP levels, dollar billions going
2020-2024 by quarter. These are various forecasts
starting in Q1 2020. The solid lines are what folks
were thinking last fall. You can see we've got CBO, IHS, Moody's, and our updated baseline, which is the red line there. You can see though we were on probably the high end of
expectations back in the fall. Then the next thing we'll
look at is the dashed lines. That's more like what
people are thinking now. You can see that right now, those projections are more optimistic than they
were a few months ago. Maybe we made a
good guess there, but it seems like we were
probably on the right track. Obviously, most of these are
projections of the future, so anything could happen, but certainly, in line
with where folks are now. Labor force and employment. This graph, same concept. Solid lines are what people were thinking back in the fall, dashed lines are what
folks are thinking now. This one's a little more
all over the place. The red line is where we
were in our follow-up date. But the dashed lines, you can see that,
especially by Q4 2024, they're all over the place. I think this really just reflects people have
different views in the future [inaudible]. Obviously, for social security,
employment is critical. That's what flows directly
into our payroll tax revenue, it's really critical
for our finances. Last economic graph I
want to show you here, pretty similar to the
first one actually. But this is nominal
wages and salaries. Again, solid lines are what folks were
thinking in fall 2020. Our estimate then
is the red line. Things are a little more optimistic right now. We do know there was
a strong recovery in 2020Q3 for now than had
been expected of the time. This really reflects that. I think I am going to turn
it back over to Steve. Steve Goss: Thank
you, Karen. First, before talking a
little bit about this, what I think is very
interesting slide. Let me just mention a couple
of real quick things. First of all, I just wanted to emphasize what Karen was saying that our November,
24 update, actually, the development of
that was an artwork, and it was done in September
of last year before any of the October and the
later fall wave came in. We were dry see flying blind on that as we all were
at that time and that explains a lot
about why a lot of expectations by many, including us, were probably not as good as we wish
they had been. Another little item I
just wanted to mention in terms of long COVID, I'm
sure everybody has seen. In fact, I think probably
several on this Zoom. We're probably involved in
talking to Time Magazine. We were. The Time Magazine recently came out with
something about long COVID. I just wanted to
point out probably many of you are even
more familiar than I believe we talked to a lot of epidemiologists and I was a
little bit taken aback when they were referring
to 10-30 percent of patients having long COVID and yet they applied that
to the total number of people who have been identified as ever having been infected. Our understanding from
epidemiologists is something like 10
percent applies more to people who had
strong reactions and were the second and not just
everybody who is infected. I think the long COVID thing in Time Magazine was probably
a little bit overplayed. Perhaps, that's just
wishful thinking. Back to the topic
of the moment, Jim. I don't want to get too far off of the idea of the
labor markets. One thing we've been paying
a lot of attention to, not just recently
because of COVID, but just in general because of the changing patterns
in productivity growth, changing patterns in our
disability applications, lots and lots of
reasons for us to be looking at the
trends in employment. I'm so glad that Katharine
is on here because this is a material pretty
recently from some BLS, so much good stuff
up on the web. This shows you by these six different broad
employment sectors, but they're broken down
much more finally, on the BLS website, which the graph was too big
to be able to do that here. But it shows you, across
his employment sectors, what has been going
on since 2010. You can see for each of
the employment sectors, some more than others,
there was a hit in 2020. Not at all surprising, in terms of the average
employment during the year 2020, compared
to what it had been in a prior
year and certainly relative to the trending. In some areas more than others, obviously, service
occupations, etc. The question is, where
are we going to be going with these in the future? We know that in 2021, we've had a lot of
recovery and again, for the very first slide,
where we were looking at what the pandemic is doing and
what it's doing as we speak. As we go into the
next several months, it's going to have further implications we
will see on that. But we see here, for the
management and professional, they had been rising as is here. These are actually
absolute numbers employed. Numbers of employed have been almost all the rise has
been happening to mention professional and not
in a lot of jobs, which tended to be perhaps more likely
to be laid off. Of course, our gigantic
question here, not just in the context
of COVID is clearly a factor and if it
turns out to be more than just a very
short-term item, which many epidemiologists
are concerned it will be, it might have more lasting
effects than just what we're seeing on the dark little
bars here for 2020. We can also look at this
though on the next slide, which puts it in terms of
percentage population. It's much the same, although this puts on a little
bit different framework. We still see the rises for management and
professional where we sit, and certainly, see how sales
and office occupations have been declining, and one
of the things we're obviously wondering about
in the longer-term, is the extent to which
COVID is going to really put a little
bit of extra flame on the fire here is movement towards things
like telework and distant working for so many jobs that are possible
in the economy. We'll be having fewer
retail store situations and more Amazon, Flybys with drones
coming in the future. There's a lot of
possibilities for changing the employment sector. In the very near term, we've seen a ton of that from
COVID and the question is, how much of that will stick? What's going to be the
half-life of these items? Really, looking forward to
it, Katharine, Michael, and Till for their views and
everybody else is going on. On the next slide, I just wanted to share it
on the slide after that. One item with respect
to the average wage. There has been much discussion
about this around June, July last year when we have many thought that wages
during your 2020, aggregate wages were
for the balance and they're going to be
much diminished. It has turned out that
wages were not as much diminished as we and
others had expected. We at the time of our September work that contributed to the
November update, we were expecting
that wages would be depressed enough
during the year, so across the board, that the average wage from 2019-2020 might
actually be lowered. This is a nominal terms at
the rate of four percent. Earlier than that,
we and others were expecting it might be
as much as six percent. That was across the board to
everybody who was opining. Was thinking that back
around July, by September, we're thinking
maybe four percent. As it turns out, because of the differential impacts on different portions
of the labor force, things have worked
out really quite differently than had
been expected back then. It looks as though we are in fact more than probably, Karen. Essentially, certainly,
we can share with you at this point the average wage. This the average wage for the total wages
during the year, divided by the number
of people work at anytime during the year, whether it be for a day, over 365 days during the year. On that concept, we are
now expecting there will indeed be an increase in the
average wage for the year, which is good news
for beneficiaries who will start
receiving benefits in 2022 because had there been a drop in
the average wage, that would have
negatively affected their benefits for life. But for a possible
legislation and that has not been the case now. It looks like we
will indeed have an increase for them
and going forward. We're running so
much along the way. On the next slide, we're
getting close to the end here, getting ready to go to
Katharine and others. Timing of benefit applications. We just wanted to share with you that in the time of COVID, very much related to the employment effects
and the labor effects, we've been seeing some
very interesting changes in the timing of people
applying for benefits. On a retirement side, we haven't really
seen that much. It's not entirely clear. Someone have been
opining that, well, under COVID, a lot of people
who might have retired, but they can now work at home, are going to keep working. On the other hand, a lot of
people who applied under COVID with more people
moving to unemployment, at least in the early term, we might have a lot of
people retiring earlier. Unbalanced, it does not appear as though there's been a lot of effect on that. On the next slide, however, we can share with you that
on disability applications, there has been a
bigger effect there. You can see that prior
to the Great Recession, you can see about the
levels that we had for our disability applications. We've talked of
these field offices. These are numbers of
people actually who apply online or have walked into a field office and
applied the number of initial DDS applications. Those are people who
actually make it to the state agencies
to be considered. You can see what those
numbers were back at around 2003 through 2010, fairly level and then it jumped up as a result of
the Great Recession. With a little bit of
a delay, of course, because what we
have seen is that when recession comes along, when a lot of people
move into unemployment, they might be tending to file
for disability benefits, but there's a tendency
to wait until the employment compensation
has run off to do that. You can see we had a ramp
in 2010, 11 and 2012, but the dramatic
drop in applications and number of disability award since then has been
really quite strong. It has continued into 2020, as you can see. Western part we
believe because of the COVID implications,
but in fact, really, it's just
an extension of the trend that we've
been seeing ever since 2010 to relatively
low levels now, and what are the
gigantic questions we're going to have again, perhaps again, related to the changing nature of work and employment in our society. Again, where it's been
really enhanced by COVID. Will that continue to hold us to lower disability
rates than we had seen in the past and will that
continue into the future, or is this just a
temporary phenomenon? With that, I believe we may be one more little slide, and
that is employment effects. Employment affects,
gigantic questions. We're going to learn
more in the balance of this panel and in
the coming months. Much discussion by
us and others about what are the implications
of the gig economy? We also know that a
very large share, more than half of self-employment income
in this country is in fact not reported, so we don't have good
records on that. Would that be changing over
time? We don't really know. Remote work for many occupations that has obviously been
ramped up considerably. Look at what we're
all doing today and to what extent
will that continue? What will be the half-life of the changes that
have been made? There are obviously
efficiencies, but there are also losses. I'm missing out on the clam bake is really a
serious issue for many of us. We're hoping to get
back in the future to what was the old reality?
But we will see. The degree of longer-term persistent effects
on the economy and economic and demographic factors is yet we believe unknowable, but we are paying close attention and looking forward to all of your
thoughts and comments. On that, I believe we
have one more slide, which is the lead
into everybody else. Again, thank you very much. Michael Stepner: Great.
Thank you. That was just Karen and Steve. That was a fantastic
overview and it attracted setup to now focus on some of the specifics about
the labor market. With that, I'm going
to move to Katharine, asked her to share screen and to tell us about some of
the things she's been seeing as focusing on with respect to labor force
participation. Thank you. Katharine Abraham:
Great. Thank you. Let me get my full screen here. I appreciated the opportunity this gives me to think a little bit about what the implications of COVID are for labor force
participation going forward. Can I just check that my
screen is shared properly? Michael Stepner: It's shared, but it's still not full-screen. Katharine Abraham: Okay. Michael Stepner: There we go. Katharine Abraham: Now I just
made it not full screen. I think there is
just a lag here. I'll assume that it
will sort itself out. It seemed like it would
be a good idea rather than just starting with
COVID to start with a little bit of historical
context for what had been happening to labor force
participation before COVID. I think people in this
group are probably pretty aware of what
has happened to the labor force
participation rate, which is the line in orange, and also the employment
to population ratio, which is the line in blue. Both of these have been trending downwards in the aggregate
for quite some time. The labor force participation over the 20 years leading up to 2019 had fallen by about
four percentage points, which is, as these things go, a pretty big decline. I think we have a pretty
good understanding of what was driving that. Part of it is due to the
aging of the baby boomers. People, you get to
retirement age, they're less likely
to be working. But there also were
significant declines in participation concentrated
in particular groups. People 16-24 in school
are much less likely to participate as of 2019 than
they were 20 years earlier. That was part of what
was driving this. Michael Stepner: Katharine, I'm just going to interrupt
you for a second. Your slides are not moving. Katharine Abraham: Okay.
I don't know why this is. Let me stop sharing
and try again. What are you seeing? Michael Stepner: We're seeing pre-COVID trends
and that's good. Katharine Abraham: Now, are
you seeing pre-COVID trends? Michael Stepner: Yeah and
we're seeing it full-screen. Good. Katharine Abraham: Okay. Good. Michael Stepner: Thank you. Katharine Abraham: The
aging of the baby boomers, the decline in participation among unskilled in school youth, and then big declines
in participation among non-college-educated
prime aged workers, which I think the
evidence suggest is best explained by
what's happened to the labor demand
for that group in a context where people did
have other alternatives, importantly, applying for
disability insurance. That was partly reversed
at the end of the 2010s, but certainly, not entirely. All of that was
partially offset by big increases in participation
among older adults. Some of that is due
to the fact that the older population is
becoming more educated. But actually, what's
more important is that at every
education level, people are working longer
than they were in the past. That's the context for
heading into COVID. What has happened to labor force participation
in the employment to population ratio
during the COVID period, you can see the
very sharp declines in both labor force
participation and the employment to
population ratio at the beginning of the crisis
in the spring of 2020. What has a lot of labor
economists puzzled is the fact that after an
initial very sharp rebound, things have not
gotten a lot better. Labor force participation in particular rebounded
quite a bit, but then it stalled. We are still at a labor force
participation rate that's nearly a couple of
percentage points below where it had been
before all of this started. I think that's the
thing that we're interested in
understanding and that will have important effects potentially going forward
for social security. What are the explanations that people have pointed to as to why labor force participation
hasn't recovered? Health concerns may be a factor, family responsibilities
may be a factor, lack of demand for certain types of workers
may be a factor, and then potentially the role of unemployment
insurance disincentives. What I thought might
be useful would be to try to look for clues
about what's going on, which of these stories
might be responsible in the changes in participation broken out by
demographic groups. Looking separately at
people by age, by sex, by the presence of
children in the home, and also by whether they're in school or not and
for older people, what their level of
educational attainment is. I wanted to just take
a couple of minutes and look at some of that. I'll start with the
16-24-year-olds, who for purposes of thinking about social
security really are the least important of all of these groups because it's going to be so long before they're at an age to be collecting social security. I've broken this out by whether
they're teenagers or in their early 20s and also by whether they're
in school or not. The thing that jumps off the page to me
about these numbers is that the group where we've really seen
significant decline, consistent declines for
both men and women in participation is the
group who are in school. I don't know how worried
we should be about that. I suspect that that has to
do with demand effects. If schools are closed, people aren't on campus. Work that they might have
done during the semester, they're not going to be doing. I shouldn't have said
that I'm looking here at the period of the first quarter of 2021 and comparing that to the
first quarter of 2020, labor force participation hasn't changed too much since then. There is also issues of seasonality that make
it harder to look at different periods for these not seasonally
adjusted data. The more important groups
for social security are the people aged 25 and up. I've broken this out
for men and women by age group and then also
by level of education. There is a couple
of things that jump out at me in these data. The first is the much
larger declines in participation for people
aged 65 and older. That's really clear for men. It's somewhat less
clear for women. But if you average out across these different education
groups for both men and women, the percentage decline
in participation is 2-4 times as big
in that age group as in any of the
other age groups. That's very consistent, I think, with health concerns driving a desire not to keep working. There is no consistent
pattern here by education. You're seeing these
declines both for low educated people and for
higher educated people. A second thing that jumps out of these numbers to me is the
very strong age gradient in both for people
aged 25-54 and was somewhat lesser
extent for people in their 50s and early 60s. Unfortunately, that doesn't help us too too much with
figuring out what's going on because that could
be driven by health concerns if less educated people are doing more
in-person type work. It could be driven
by lack of demand. It could be driven by unemployment
insurance incentives, at least in principle. A last thing to
point out here is the substantially
larger declines in participation for women. Look at the 25-54 year
old age group versus men. Some people looking at that have said maybe what's
going on is that it's family responsibilities
that are keeping women out of the labor force. There is an interesting
recent paper by Jason Furman, Melissa Kearney,
and Wilson Powell, that tried to take
a look at this. I've adapted what they did to look at labor
force participation. If that was what was going on, you would expect to see that among women in particular
that the declines in participation would be much
bigger for women who have children under the age of 13 at home than for
those who don't. If you look at women who
have less than a BA degree, it's a little bit bigger decline for the women with children, but it's only a
percentage point. If you push the numbers through, it can explain hardly any of Steve Goss: the decline
in participation Katharine Abraham: we've seen because
they're just not that big a group. If you look at people
with a bachelor's degree, you don't even see
that pattern at all. I find that to be pretty
compelling evidence that family responsibilities
aren't what's driving what we're seeing. What can we take away from these clues that we get by looking at
differences by demographics? I think the patterns are
certainly consistent with health concerns
having been important. Both the differences
by education level and the very large declines
among people over age 65. I don't think the patterns
are consistent with family responsibilities
driving this. Then the patterns, particularly the
education gradient, are consistent with
a number of stories and I wish there was a
better way to sort them out. It could be health, it could be labor
demand factors. In principle, it could be
unemployment disincentives. Though I think the evidence
against that story that I'm not going to talk about is
actually pretty compelling. I think Mike may have
more to say about that. The better question for
social security is, are these effects
going to persist? I have to agree with Steve, it's just very hard to say,
given what we know now, what the persistent
effects of this will be. Health concerns may have a continuing effect on keeping people out
of the labor force. It's going to depend a lot
on vaccination rates and also how effective the vaccines are against the new variants. My guess would be that
people past the age of 65, who have left the labor market
are unlikely to return. In terms of effects on
social security, though, that's not going to be two
important because many of these people would have retired within a few years, regardless. A big unknown is whether these shifts in demand that we've seen will
persist beyond the pandemic. There's a school of thought exemplified by the
interesting paper by Barrera, Bloom, and Davis
that was published in the Brookings
Papers last year. That argues that a lot of the shifts we're
seeing will persist, that with teleworking
downtowns are going to die. That we aren't going to see
business travel which will affect airlines and
hotels and restaurants. You look at some of these
high-tech companies. Facebook says it's going to move to a largely remote workforce, but then they're buying
office based in Manhattan. They bought a whole office
building in Manhattan. It's very unclear what these shifts in demand
are going to look like. They could be important in that, do we know that shifts
and demand have depressed labor force participation for less educated workers
for a long time, and this could exacerbate that. Then finally,
there's an argument that lifestyle
changes prompted by the pandemic could lead to
permanent changes in the way that people supply labor
to the labor market. You can read all
of these stories about people deciding
that it's just not worth it to be working as
hard as I was and I'm not going to return to work. It's just very hard to
say one way or the other. If I had to guess, I would say that the
long-run effects on labor force participation
will be pretty modest. But there's certainly a lot
of things to keep an eye on. Let me stop with that. James M. Poloba: Great.
That's just terrific. I mean, thank you for giving
us that overview with this. Lots to think about there, but also a lot that we
are seeing already, that is very informative on
how this is all working. With that, let me
shift gears and turn to Michael Stepner
looking at some of the high-frequency
and other data that the Opportunity Insights team
has put together and that Michael has played a
leading role in working on. Michael Stepner: Thank you,
Jim. I'm really excited. I think this talk is going
to be very complimentary to the demographic breakdowns that we were just looking at. I want to give credit. I've been working on
this with Raj Chetty and John Friedman and Nathan
Hendren and a fantastic team of young researchers based at
Opportunity Insight to have been processing the
data from all of these private sector firms
on the bottom right of the screen into economically
interpretable series. In this talk, I want to
start on the solid grounds, the story we're familiar with over the course
of the pandemic, and end with the open questions that I hope will lead us into a really productive
discussion during this panel. This story really starts with a massive shortfall in GDP, starting in the second
quarter of 2020, where GDP fell by 32 percent relative
to the first quarter. If you disaggregate that, most of that fall was
driven by a change in personal consumption expenditure
and even the majority still can be explained
by changes in the types of consumption that are measurable on credit cards. Let's start to look at
how credit card spending changed over the course
of the pandemic. What we see is that if
we break this out into the top income quartile and
the bottom income quartile. There was a huge shortfall in spending of about three
billion dollars per day that started in March
and hit its trough in April, followed by a slow but
incomplete recovery over the course of 2020, where even toward
the end of 2020, high-income spending remained
$700 million lower per day than it was before the pandemic or
than it was in 2019. Whereas at the bottom of
the income distribution, you had about a one
billion dollar shortfall in spending at that trough, followed by actually a
complete recovery and spending as the safety
net programs kicked in. There's this big disparity and who stopped spending during the pandemic as well as the disparity in what they
stopped spending money on. Contrary to a typical recession, we see a large shortfall in
spending on durable goods. What we saw during
the COVID pandemic was that the majority
of the decline, two-thirds of the
decline in spending was focused on in-person services. If you compare that to
the Great Recession, this is a very
different concentration of where people's spending fell. All of these spending
changes over the course of the pandemic had rippled
through the economy, through business revenues
into employment. We can pick up those
effects when we look at the disparities
in employment. I think we've already seen a really nice breakdown
of the disparities by different demographics and what we can learn from that. I hope to present a
complimentary analysis of the disparities
by income group. If we look at the shortfall in employment in the
bottom income quartile, there was a 35 percent decline
initially in employment, about 12 million
low-income workers out of a job in April of 2020, followed by a large but
incomplete recovery. That recovery has basically stagnated since the
summer of last year. It remains about 20 percent of low-income workers who were employed in 2019
remain out of a job. Now, qualitatively, there was a drop for all income groups at the beginning
of the pandemic, everyone was suffering
in April of 2020. But in terms of employment, the recession ended for high-income workers
by June of 2020, where high-income
workers returned to their jobs for the most part, and employment at the top of the income distribution
has returned to 2019 levels and has been at 2019 levels since
the summer of 2020. I want to spend much of the rest of the talk
unpacking what are the mechanisms driving this
extremely asymmetric effect of COVID on employment. I think the natural
starting point is to think that this
might have to do with the concentration
of the effects of the pandemic in
certain industries that might disproportionately
employ low-income workers, as well as in
certain areas, where low-income work is
most prevalent. I can immediately rule that out as a major source
of the story by reweighting low-wage work to match the top-income quartile
by county and by industry. This story, where we see
this large asymmetry, is not explained by
just what industries these workers are in and what counties they're living in. There's something
else going on here. If we actually focus
on the retail sector, I think this becomes
especially stark. Where retail
consumption, you had that initial spike when everyone went out to buy toilet paper, and then that initial decline when everyone
stayed home and didn't go out of their homes as we had no idea what was happening
in April of 2020. Afterwards, the
spending on goods actually was higher
than in a typical year. High-wage employment
recovered accordingly, similarly to consumer spending, while low-wage
employment remained depressed and remains
depressed today. Despite the fact that spending
fully recovered, in fact, more than recovered, low-wage employment
remains depressed. Let's talk through
the mechanisms and here's where I transition from having answers to having questions,
informed questions, but questions nonetheless that I think can inform a
broader discussion with Steve and Karen and Till, and the whole audience. Let's talk about mechanisms. To organize this discussion, I want to focus on two
dimensions of the mechanisms. The mechanisms that fall on the labor demand side versus
the labor supply side, and then unpacking to
what extent we think these changes might be
transitory or permanent. Throughout this talk,
I'm actually going to skip over the
health concerns, which I think are no doubt a massive factor
in the short run. But I think, when we think
about the long run, 10, 15, 20 years, the things that are
affecting Social Security, I think I'd like to
focus on the types of factors that might persist
throughout the new normal. Let's start by talking
about labor demand factors. I think there are two
key ones to think about in this
asymmetric recovery. The first is the
shift in activity, economic activity from
small businesses to large businesses and from in-person services
to online services. During the pandemic,
we saw large, big box stores and online retailers like
Amazon and Target posting record profits while small businesses closed
at record rates. Those small businesses tend
to employ more workers per dollar of sales, while large business
like Amazon are very efficient and highly
focused on efficiency. One key question is to
what extent these shifts in economic activity will
last in the new normal. A second change is
just changes in the way a given business
produces its output. Whether that's
increased automation through self-checkout, changes in how
production is made, through automation and robotics. The work of David Autor
and others argues that to some extent, the pandemic has accelerated existing shifts. We were already moving
in this direction, but in the face of
huge disruptions, there was an opportunity
for business to move faster to the automated future that we were already
heading toward. I have more data on the labor supply factors, where I think there's three
that I think about a lot. The moral hazard effect of
expanded safety net payments, the liquidity effect of those safety net payments
and changes in preferences. Starting with the
moral hazard effect, I think there has been
fantastic work on this from the team at
JPMorgan Chase Institute. I saw Pascal Noel
presenting this work last week at the public
economics section. What they find is that the moral hazard that they
can detect from the end of the $600 supplements or the start of the $300
supplements more recently, just cannot explain the large
shortfalls in employment. They write that there's
little evidence that elevated unemployment insurance
benefits discouraged people from returning to work. That job finding showed no sustained increase after
the supplement expired. More than half of jobless
workers who received the $600 supplement returned to work before the
supplement ended. Overall, while these
supplements expanded spending, they calculate that employment
was only a fraction of a percentage point lower as a result of the
benefit expansions. Now, that would be perhaps, substantial when we have four percent unemployment rates, but that doesn't explain
the 20 percent unemployment in the bottom of the
income distribution. I think, a really interesting
open question is to what extent liquidity
can explain this? Because we've seen
record savings over the course of the pandemic. Those have been especially high in the top income quartile. But even at the bottom
income quartile, you've had a large expansion
of liquidity driven by stimulus checks and
unemployment insurance benefits, really driven by an
expansion of the safety net. Here in our discussion, I can quote Twitter where
I think Matt Notowidigdo echoes thoughts that
I really agree with, just that the work from 2008 on the liquidity and
behavioral responses to unemployment insurance suggests that this expanded
liquidity might really have a massive impact on
people's labor force, participation on
their labor supply, and that liquidity effect
is unlikely to persist. It's unlikely to be
a permanent effect. That would likely be
a transitory effect. Finally, to wrap up
changes in preferences, and there I would include
health concerns, but also, I think Betsy Stevenson and Erin Debay have been
writing about this that one of the key changes we see are massive
expansion in quits, where quits are especially
high right now. It's not just that people
who are outside of the labor force are
refusing to return, but rather there's a lot of
churn within the labor force. When you survey people, do you plan to change industry or look for a
new type of occupation? Unprecedented numbers of workers reported interests in a
change in their jobs. We see these changes
in preferences driven by really a
massive disruption in the labor market that I think change
people's reservation wages, which might be driving some of this disequilibrium
where employment is low and wages are rising. I conclude by just saying that the labor market had an unprecedented shock in 2020, unprecedented in size, and it
remains in disequilibrium. I would say we're on
a transition path from the old normal
to the new normal. That transition path involves multiple mechanisms that are affecting both labor
demand and labor supply. I have three key questions that I do not yet
know the answer to, but I think we'll start
to be clarified by the work of economists over
the coming few months, say over the rest of this year. The first is how permanent
are those shifts in activity across businesses and the shifts in production within businesses? Second, how does labor
supply change as benefits are expiring and these liquidity buffers
are getting spanked down? Finally, how has the bargaining
power between employers and employees changed and
will those changes last? I don't have the answers
to all of those questions, but I look forward to
discussing them with all of you during this panel. James M. Poloba: Lest
anyone think we're going to succeed in answering
those three questions before the end of the panel or before the end of the year, or before the end of the decade, I think they will all be
with us for quite awhile. But Michael, thank you
for teeing this off. Till, let me come to you to
talk about further work on UI and also the long-term
consequences here of job loss. Till von Wachter: Great. Can
you see my slides moving? James M. Poloba: We can. Till von Wachter: Fantastic. Well, thank you very
much for having me. It's a great pleasure to be here and talking about what would be complimentary to what Katharine, and Michael, and
Stephen talked about. I'll start out with
presenting a little bit of evidence on labor market effects from California UI claims. Then I'll pivot to talk
about discussion about the medium to
longer-term effects of job loss on employment. Now, through a corporation with the California
Department of Labor, we obtained access to the universe of unemployment insurance
records from California. The reason that I'm talking to you about this today is that that's data that's typically
very hard to access. In particular,
during this crisis, given the increase
in coverage of UI, we now have an
incredible amount of very detailed information of
who received UI benefits. I'll give you the three
broad findings among many from our monthly and now quarterly unemployment
insurance reports. Again, these are for California, but given the state that's very hard to access for
the rest of the US. There are some
interesting lessons for the US as a whole in there. As Michael and
Katharine pointed out, the crisis was quite unequal in its effect on unemployment rates of different types of workers. The UI claims data
really helped to zoom in on the
distributional impacts. As others have said before, women, younger and
older workers, workers of color and lower educated workers
in particular, had very high rates
of UI claiming and longer UI benefits
spells in California. Especially older workers and black workers had lower
employment and recall rates. Same is true for lower
educated workers. Now, what the UI data
allows you is to really zoom in quite specifically. Here, I show you a figure as an example where we
looked at the rate of long-term unemployment
at the county level and correlated it with
county characteristics. That's helpful because
sometimes it's actually a bit difficult to line up demographics from the
survey data say, the ACS. Here we have ACS county
characteristics and we can see that the
counties that have a higher rate of long-term
unemployment over proportionally are more
likely to be black, have a higher share
of COVID cases, have a higher share of non-citizens of limited English speaking population density. This unequal patterns
of the impact of the crisis of the spatial level holds true at the
census track level, it holds true in many
other measures of unequal impact and also
in rates of re-employment and such data can be quite useful in thinking
how to possibly support workers
and communities as federal UI benefits
might be running out. Another thing you can
really only learn from UI data is that we see that, among people who are receiving
unemployment insurance, there's quite a bit
of connection to employment and to
past employers, at least in this crisis. Since the fall of 2020, of course, not '21, over 80 percent of
initial UI claims in California's where re-entries or workers who had
already been laid off, had found a job and
filed again for UI. Conversely, again, since
fall of last year, 30-40 percent of
those workers who exited UI returned
to the UI system. There's been a lot
of churn in and out of employment and
in an out of UI. You also see that pretty
substantial share of workers in harder hit sectors by the pandemic such
as food service, work while receiving UI. UI has not been a state of just long term
unemployment with no work. It's been in and out of
UI with partial work. As workers get recall, a high share of those
that did find a job in 2020 returned to
their past employer. I think especially
in this crisis, the UI system would
increase coverage, is a great venue to connect to workers who may be at risk of dropping out of
the labor force, especially when
federal UI benefits expire and to try to keep
them in the labor force. That's, of course, most
relevant for the workers. That brings me to
my third point from the UI claims data is that by enlarging this
crisis older workers were more heavily impacted
than middle age workers. That's not true relative
to younger workers, younger workers saw very
high rates of UI claiming. But workers who are
either 55-64 or 65 and above had a very
high share of filing UI benefits into 12
months since the crisis started and also had a higher likelihood of experiencing long-term
unemployment. If you look at these numbers that are highlighted, these are just very large rates
of UI claimants. Forty five percent of
55-64-year olds in California that were in the labor force in
February 2020 for UI, that's just a massive
group of individual. Similarly, the rates of long-term unemployment
are staggering and all the workers have
so far been less likely to find jobs compared
to middle aged workers. The stronger effects in all the workers would
lead me to think, Steve mentioned this that, we haven't seen really arise in early claiming of
Social Security but that's certainly something
to watch out for as federal UI benefits
expire in the fall. Turning now to short versus medium versus long run employment
effects of the crisis. We know from past
recessions that over the short medium run, a large spike in
job losses leads to a persistent
reduction in employment. If you do a backup the
envelope calculation as I did earlier this
year you would get a persistent effect lasting 10-15 years out on their
employment population ratio. You can think, especially for older workers, for which
these drop-off effects are particularly large,
that a substitution effect from a large wage loss dominates a potential wealth effects
because the loss and lifetime earnings is not so large if you lose your
job closer to retirement. This might look very different
over the longer run. In the longer run,
if workers may lose their job in midlife or
even at younger ages, they're potentially quite
persistent and large losses in lifetime earnings, and
of course, they may have low annual earnings or zeros in their Social
Security earnings history. These midlife shocks
could then lead to an extension in working
lives later on and the idea here is, of course, that the
effect from lifetime income dominates a substitution effect if you want to think
about it in this term. For somebody who's
a full-time worker, extending the working life is, of course, one way
to recoup some of these losses in
lifetime earnings. To get a sense of the potential likelihood
of this happening, I'm going to show you one
figure from an analysis of job losses that occurred
during the '82 recession. The immediate short to medium-term employment
losses from job loss during
the '82 recession is similar to what it was, say during the Great Recession. But the advantage
of going back to the '82 recession is of
course that we can look at individuals for
many years and we can see how somebody
who is displaced at age 35 or 40 whether they work longer as they're
turning 60 and older. We follow standard assumption in the job displacement
literature and these are estimates for men that had at least a job for
three years at a midsize or larger firms and we
compare job losers to a control group of workers
that did not lose the job. Here's the one figure summary of the findings and the
figure shows you the change in average age of filing the older
age and survivor benefits of filing Social
Security benefits. The horizontal axis of
this figure shows you how many years since
displacement we're looking at. To the left, you
see the effect of displacement that occur
near retirement age because workers usually can only file at age 62 and usually
file between 62 and 65. If you see an effect
in the short run, Steve Goss: these
other job losses Till von Wachter: that occur
when workers were near retirement age and the job
losses to the right here are among workers that lost
their jobs in middle age. What you see here is
that the first 5-10 years there is a decline
in claiming age. Meaning workers who lost
their job closer to retirement age filed
benefits earlier. This is reversed as you
look past 10 years, especially 15, 20 years after a job loss workers
tend to file later. You see the same
pattern, if you look at annual earnings as a measure of labor supply or the probability of having
any earning in a year. We see a short to medium
term reduction in labor supply that then is
reversed over the longer run. This, of course, interesting
as we think about this large shock during
the crisis where a large group of individuals was affected at the same time. We can think of drawing
out a similar curve and predicting what might
be going on in the future. With that, I'm
ready to conclude. We've seen a very
unequal distribution of employment losses, and that
bears with it a risk of permanent labor
force withdrawal and early Social Security claiming, especially for older, lower-income workers
that may then also see a loss in Social Security benefits
and have quite low wealth. The second point I made is that the UI system in particular
during this crisis could be used to connect to all the workers or other
workers at risk of dropping permanently out of
the labor force. This is a somewhat understood the subject because usually we just don't have such
good data on UI claims. Then finally, it's worth
thinking about the short, medium to long term effects of the crisis unemployment
trends as we're projecting forward what will
be happening in the future. I made the point that
it might be that the short to medium term
effects are likely to be persistently negative
maybe different than the longer run
effects. Thank you. 