Steven Kaplan: Wow. Well,
thank you very much for that introduction, Jim. We were at the Bureau actually
at the same time back in, it must have been,
1979. Good afternoon. I am privileged and delighted to deliver the 2012
Martin Feldstein lecture, honoring Marty's
outstanding tenure as president of the NBER. As Jim said, it is
particularly special because Marty gave me my
start in economics research. He hired me, I think,
after my sophomore year to work at the Bureau and then was my undergraduate
thesis advisor. So, Marty, thank you for
hiring me, and for inspiring me to become an economist and professor, and for
helping me along the way. Thanks. Today, I'm
going to explore some commonly held
perceptions of executive compensation
in corporate governance in the United States. There are three general
themes to these perceptions. The first, CEOs are overpaid and their
pay keeps increasing. Second, CEOs are not
paid for performance. Third, boards are not
doing their jobs. In their influential work,
Lucian Bebchuk and Fried conclude that flawed
compensation arrangements have not been limited to a
small number of bad apples. They have been widespread,
persistent, and systemic. So in my talk today, I'm going to consider the accuracy of those
perceptions today. What are the facts
about CEO pay levels? Is it true that the typical CEO is not paid for performance? How much, and how well do public company boards
monitor their CEOs, particularly for
poor performance? More generally, is our corporate governance
system broken? The recurring question
that I'm going to try to address is, what are the drivers of
CEO pay and governance? Is it driven by the power that CEOs wield over their boards, leading CEOs to be
overpaid? Is pay driven by a competitive market for talent and CEOs are paid appropriately, or is pay driven by some combination of those
two forces and others? Once I've addressed
those questions, I'll discuss the implications
and challenges they pose for researchers,
boards, and shareholders. Let's begin with the
first perception. CEOs are overpaid and their
pay keeps increasing. To answer this, you first have to
define what CEO pay is. There are two ways
to measure CEO pay. The first is estimated
or grant day pay. This includes the CEO's salary, bonus, the value of
restricted stock issued, and the estimated value of the options issued to
the CEO that year, usually calculated
with Black-Sholes or some option
valuation formula. This is the compensation package that the board has awarded the CEO, and it's the appropriate measure for assessing the effectiveness
of board governance. It's what the board thought
they were giving the CEO. The second measure
is realized CEO pay, and that includes salary, bonus, the value of restricted stock, and the value of the
options the CEO exercised. Because it uses
actual option gains, not the theoretical values, the second measure is
a better measure of the amount of money the CEO actually takes home
in a given year. Accordingly, realized pay is the more appropriate measure for considering whether CEOs are
paid for firm performance because the firm's
actual performance affects the value
of the options. So now let's see what happens when we look
at estimated pay. Again, that's the pay awarded
by the board to the CEO. Let's look at how
that's moved over time. What I'm going to begin
with is the CEO of S&P 500 companies
from 1993 to 2010, using data from Standard and Poor's executive comp database, and these are the largest
publicly-traded US companies. Now, the question is, what has happened to average estimated CEO pay adjusted for
inflation since 2000? Has it gone up, has it stayed the same,
or has it declined? I'd ask you now, but I'm not sure what
you will answer. Let me tell you what happened when I've asked other
people this question. I asked this question
to a group of corporate governance
academics a little while ago, and I asked the question to a number of public company
chief financial officers. In both audiences,
somewhere between, let's say 50 percent and
2/3, said pay had gone up, about 1/4 or 1/3 said
pay had been flat, and a few people said
pay had gone down, and I think the
perception is pay keeps going up. What happened? While average CEO
pay increased, and the blue lines are average,
and the red are median, while average CEO pay increased markedly from '93 to 2000, it declined by over 46 percent from 2000 to 2010. Median CEO pay also increased
markedly from '93 to 2000, peaked in 2001, and has
declined slightly since then. That convergence
between the means and the medians suggests
that boards have begun substantially less
likely to award large and unusual pay
packages to CEOs since 2000. So the first perception
that pay keeps increasing, which is a perception
that is widely shared, even by public company
chief financial officers, turns out to be a misperception. Now, that doesn't mean
there are still not some outliers, and the
outliers do receive attention. There were three CEOs
in 2010 who received over $50 million
in estimated pay, and those are hard
to understand, but the means and
medians indicate that they're outliers and
not the general rule. The executive comp
database also includes the CEOs of more than a
thousand smaller companies, not in the S&P 500, and average estimated
pay for these CEOs, like those in the S&P 500, increased in the '90s and
declined in the 2000s. The increases were smaller
in magnitude than those for the S&P 500, both the magnitude of the increases
and the declines. Like the S&P 500 CEOs, the average pay levels today of the smaller
companies' CEOs are roughly where they
were in 1997 and 1998. So overall, estimated CEO pay, which is the pay that boards
are expecting to pay, peaked in 2000 and 2001
for both groups and has returned to roughly the level
it was in 1997 and 1998. Now, while average
pay is declined, it remains quite high. In 2010, the average S&P 500
CEO received estimated pay of just over $10 million, and the median was just
over 8.5 million. Of course, these
amounts are much greater than the income of
the typical US household. Average CEO pay peaked
in 2000 at over 350 times the median, and while it's declined to
roughly 200 times, that multiple is
still very high and undoubtedly contributes
to the perception that CEOs are overpaid. Now, there's one
other element to the comparisons of CEO pay over time that are
worth mentioning. The average lengths
of CEO tenures today are shorter than
they were in the past. As a result, comparing
CEO pay in the 2000s to CEO pay in the
1990s and earlier is not exactly an
apples-to-apples comparison. In the '70s, '80s, and mid-'90s, roughly 10 percent of CEOs of large US companies
turned over each year, not counting takeovers. That implies a typical CEO
tenure of roughly 10 years. Since 1998, that turnover has increased to about
12 percent a year, which implies a decline in CEO tenure from 10
years to eight years. When takeovers are included, the tenures have declined from roughly eight
years before 1998 to about six years now.
What does that mean? The decline in tenure
implies that the CEO job has become riskier, and the shorter expected tenure arguably offsets
20 percent or so of the benefits of the
increase in CEO pay over this period. In other words, the
true increase in CEO pay since the early '90s is lower than the compensation
figures alone would suggest. Now let's look at how public company CEO pay compares to other
highly paid groups. Although estimated CEO pay and CEO tenures have declined, it's clear that CEOs are highly paid and have done very
well since the early '90s. The important question is
why they have done so well. Gabaix and Landier argue that market forces can explain
the increases in CEO pay. In a simple competitive model, they show that CEO
pay will be bid up as firms become larger because larger
average firm's size increases the returns to
hiring a more productive CEO. They find, empirically,
that the increase in CEO pay since 1980 can be fully attributed to the increase in large
company market values. So Gabaix and Landier, as well as Friedman and Sachs,
and Murphy and Zabojnic, focused on the market for top executives of
public companies. But the same people also can become executives at
private companies, become or remain consultants, and earlier in their
career, become lawyers, investment bankers,
or investors. In a competitive market
for talent, similarly, talented individuals
should have done as well as CEOs over the
last 20 or 30 years. This very familiar graph from Piketty and Saez
shows that there was a big increase in the share of pre-tax income earned by
very high earners over the last 30 years is consistent with a number of groups
doing very well. This is the top 0.1 percent
of adjusted gross income. So what I'm going
to do is compare the average estimated pay of S&P 500 CEOs to the average adjusted
gross income of taxpayers in the
top 0.1 percent. In 2010, the average
adjusted gross income of that group was just
under $5 million. It's a group that's
comparable to the CEOs. Because there are roughly
140,000 such taxpayers, the 500 S&P 500
CEOs are not going to affect the average
for that group. Let's see what happened. Average estimated pay for
S&P 500 CEOs relative to the average adjusted gross
income of the top 0.1 percent in 2010 is about
what it was in 1994. So overall, over this period, S&P 500 CEOs have seen
very little change in their estimated pay relative to where it was in
the early '90s. Smaller company CEOs, the non-S&P 500 CEOs, have actually done slightly
less well over time. In every year, the
average non-S&P 500 CEO was not in the top
0.1 percent, and today, they're worse off relative to the top 0.1 percent than they were in
the early 1990s. So over the last 20 years, public company CEO
pay relative to the very top has remained relatively constant
or even declined, and those patterns
are consistent with the competitive
market for talent. They're less clearly
consistent with managerial power
over that period, and that's because the
other top income groups, not subject to
managerial power forces, have seen a similar
growth in pay. What about the longer term? Right now, I've just
looked at pay since 1993. What's happened since the 1930s? To do this, I stapled
together three data sets. I used executive
comp from 1992-2010. I used data from
Hall and Liebman for large company CEOs
from 1980-1992, and I used data from
Friedman and Sachs for very large public
companies from 1936-1980. I compared this long time
series of estimated CEO pay, again, to the average AGI
of the top 0.1 percent. Over the long term, estimated CEO pay
relative to the pay of that top 0.1 percent, it's fluctuated but has remained stable averaging
roughly 1.9 times. The average is actually
particularly low in the 1980s. It goes to the historical
average in the mid-'90s, got unusually high
in the late 1990s, and in 2010, it's returned, more or less,
to its long-term average. Now the unanswered
question is, what drives the fluctuations over time? But there seems to be a
tendency to stay around too. Now the next slide shows the ratio of average
estimated CEO pay to the average market value of the top 500 publicly
traded companies. CEO pay was a much
higher fraction of market value in the '30s, '40s, and '50s than
it was after 1960. This replicates the findings
in Friedman and Sachs. Since 1960, however,
the ratio of CEO pay to market value has remained
much more stable, averaging about 0.04
percent of market value, and the ratio in
2010 was a little bit below that at 0.036 percent. Since 1960, the
data support this simple Gabaix and Landier story of a competitive
market for talent. The unanswered question is why the pattern is so
different before 1960. Taken together, the long-run patterns suggest that a combination of the market for talent and firm scale have been meaningfully
associated with large company CEO pay
over a long period of time. I've now compared CEOs to the average income of people
in the top income brackets. It's also possible to
compare the pay of public company CEOs to the pay of specific
groups in those brackets that are likely to have similar opportunities
or talents, particularly non-public
company executives, lawyers, and investors. In a recent paper, Bakija, Cole, and Heim studied
IRS tax return data between 1979 and 2005. They tried to compare
public company and private company executives
by distinguishing those who received the majority of their income in salary and wages from those who
receive the majority of their income from
self-employment. The former are more likely to include public
company executives, while the latter are
most likely to include executives of
closely-held businesses. What you find is that
the pay of executives of closely-held
businesses increased by more than the pay of salaried
executives from 1979-1993 and again from 1993-2005. Furthermore, closely-held firm executives increased their representation in the top 0.1 percent from just under nine
percent to 22 percent, whereas salaried
executives went down, going from 38 percent
to 20 percent. So what you see there is that the public company executives, those who should have been more subject to managerial
power problems, saw their pay and relatively standing increase less
than the executives of closely-held company businesses that are by definition
controlled by large shareholders
or the executives and are subject to
limited agency problems. That's notable
because many of the salaried and
closely-held executives presumably come from the
same general executive pool and presumably can move between public and private
company employment. Bakija, Cole, and Heim also distinguished among
taxpayers were employed as business executives and financial executives,
and in their data, the income share of
the top 0.1 percent increased by a factor of
more than three times. The business
executives increased by roughly the same three times. Taxpayers in finance
did even better. They increased their
share by five times. So now lawyers. Lawyers
at top firms are another useful comparison group, and they're not often mentioned. But much of the work
these law firms and lawyers provide is
for corporate clients. Because the law firms
are partnerships, and their fees are negotiated
in an arm's length manner, partner pay at those
law firms is arguably market-based and not subject to managerial power concerns. Lawyers at top law firms
also are interesting because the general counsels of large public companies are
often former law partners. Accordingly, there's some
overlap in the market for talent between top
executives and top lawyers. What's happened to
top law partner pay? It's also gone up quite
a bit from roughly $700,000 a year to almost
$1.6 million in 2010. The ratio of S&P 500
CEOs' estimated pay to average profit per partner has remained roughly the same. If anything, that
ratio has gone down, meaning top law partners have done slightly better relative to public company CEOs over this period. Now, another very highly paid
is top hedge fund managers. Since 2001, absolute return
in Alpha Magazine has published an annual rich list of the 25 highest paid
hedge fund managers. They estimate the annual
income of those managers from fees and from their capital
invested in the funds. This is going to overstate the income of the
hedge fund managers attributable to their employment because it also includes
some investment income, but nevertheless the results
are pretty interesting. The average income of the hedge fund managers
in millions of 2010 dollars grew
from $134 million in 2002 to a peak of over a
billion dollars in 2007. Those are obviously
much higher than the $10 million averages
for S&P 500 CEOs. To put this in perspective, you can compare the combined
or total incomes of the 25 highest paid
hedge fund managers to the total estimated pay
of the 500 S&P 500 CEOs. Since 2005, those 25 top hedge
fund managers as a group have earned 2-6 times as much
as all 500 S&P 500 CEOs. In other words, hedge
fund managers have done quite a bit better than CEOs. Now, what does all this mean? The point of these comparisons is to confirm that. while public company CEOs earn a great deal, they are not unique. Those other groups with similar backgrounds
and talents, private company executives, corporate lawyers, investors, and others, have seen significant pay
increases where there's a competitive market
for talent and no managerial power
problems exist. As some people look
at the higher CEO pay as evidence of managerial
power or capture, you have to explain why these other professional
groups that don't have those issues have had a similar or even
higher growth in pay. Instead, it seems more likely that a
meaningful portion of the increase in public
company CEO pay has been driven
by market forces. Now, what are those
market forces? In our work, Josh Rauh
and I concluded that some combination of
changes in technology, along with an increase in the scale of enterprises
and finance, have allowed more talented
or fortunate people to increase their productivity
relative to others. That seems relevant
for the increase in pay of lawyers and investors. Technology allows
them to acquire information and trade large
amounts more efficiently, as well as CEOs, where
technology allows them to manage very large
global organizations. Under this view, as
firms have become more valuable, and
technology has allowed CEOs to
affect that value, boards have responded
by spending more to attract and motivate talent. So that's pay levels. Now, let's move to the
second perception that CEO pay is not tied
to firm performance. According to the
managerial power story, managers control
their boards, and boards are too friendly
to management, and boards do not pay
for performance or fire CEOs for
poor performance. Now, the key question
on pay is whether CEOs who perform better earn
more in realized pay. Again, realized pay includes
option exercises and is a better measure of what
the CEO actually takes home. For each year from
1999-2004, in our paper, Josh Rauh and I took all the firms in the
executive comp database, sorted them into five
groups based on assets. We did that because it's well-established that
larger firms pay more. Within each size
group for each year, we sorted the CEOs
into five groups based on how much compensation
they actually realized. Then we looked at how
the stocks of each group performed, relative
to their industry, over the previous three years. What we find in all the
different size group is that realized
compensation is very highly related to firm
stock performance. So in every group, firms with
CEOs in the top quintile of pay are the top
performing quintile, relative to their industries, and firms with CEOs in the bottom quintile of pay are the worst-performing
quintiles relative to their industry. The magnitudes are
relatively large. The bottom line from
this is that there is pay for performance when
you look at realized pay. Similarly, Friedman
and Sachs studied the correlation between executive wealth and
firm performance, and they find that CEO wealth has been strongly tied to firm performance
since the 1930s and that relationship
strengthened considerably after the mid-1980s. Kevin Murphy, in
his recent survey, reports that the
equity at stake, which is the change
in CEO wealth from a one percent change
in stock price for the median S&P
500 CEO was almost $600,000 in 2010 and has been at that level or higher in all
but one year since 1998. Overall, the evidence is consistent with
realized CEO pay and CEO wealth being strongly
tied to firm performance. In their surveys, Kevin
Murphy, as well as Carola Frydman and Dirk Jenter, reached
similar conclusions. Now, the more difficult
question, which I think is not clear, is how much pay for
performance is optimal and whether the
current practices can become more efficient. Some argue that pay
for performance is too low and
should be increased. Others argue that some pay
for performance incentives, particularly in
financial services, are too high and
should be lowered. Pay for performance is also criticized because
pay is based on absolute or actual
performance rather than performance relative
to a firm's industry. In other words, CEOs and
executives are paid to some extent for general
economic conditions or luck. While the lack of explicit relative performance
evaluation is a puzzle, it's worth noting that
private equity investors, who we know are strongly
motivated to make profits, do not appear to use relative performance
evaluation for CEOs of their companies. If relative
performance evaluation were meaningfully
more efficient, you might expect to see private equity investors
make more use of it. Now, to the third perception. Are boards doing their jobs? Critics contend that boards have become too friendly
to management. As I mentioned earlier, the turnover result
suggests the opposite. CEO turnover levels
appear to have increased since the late 1990s,
meaning CEOs can expect to be CEOs for less
time than in the past. It's also the case that
CEO turnover has become increasingly related to poor
firm stock performance. So the CEO job is riskier, and CEOs face significant
performance pressure. That's actually consistent with the corporate governance system that has performed
better since 1997. Now, there's a recent
paper by Jenter and Lewellen that presents additional evidence
consistent with this. They look at CEO turnover in the executive comp
data from '92-2004. They find that boards
aggressively fire CEOs for poor industry
adjusted performance, and that that turnover
performance sensitivity increases substantially
with higher-quality boards. So what you see there is in the first five years
of a CEO's tenure. CEOs who perform in
the bottom quintile relative to their industry
lose their jobs about 60 percent of the time, and the CEOs on the
top quintile lose their jobs only 18
percent of the time. So there's a very
big spread between companies that perform well and companies that perform poorly. When you focus on
boards that are more independent and have
greater stock ownership, that spread increases to
more than 70 percent. As with pay for performance, the more difficult question is whether those differential
departure rates are optimal and whether
the current practices can become more efficient. Now, it would be useful to know what shareholders
think of all this. I'm not sure if "fortunately"
is the right word, but fortunately, the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
of 2010 mandated that all firms with more
than $75 million in publicly traded stock hold a nonbinding
shareholder vote on the compensation of the
top five executives, and those votes are known
as say-on-pay votes. The law went into
effect in 2011. The supporters of the provision believed that by increasing
shareholder power, the say-on-pay
votes would reduce the CEO pay spiral and would increase
pay for performance. This is, more or less, the
view of those who take the managerial
power position that CEOs have captured
the pay process. Under the alternative view
that pay levels and pay for performance are
largely determined in a competitive market, the say-on-pay votes
would be a non-event. So the say-on-pay votes
set up a useful test of the managerial power view versus the market
for talent view. What happened? The
votes in 2011 were overwhelmingly in favor
of existing pay policies. Roughly, 98 percent of companies received
majority support. More than 73 percent received a favorable
vote above 90 percent, and fewer than eight
percent of the companies received a favorable vote
of less than 70 percent. To this point, the 2012 votes have followed a pretty
similar pattern. The few companies that didn't
receive majority support, as well as some of
the companies with a substantial
minority of No votes, suggest that some CEOs
undoubtedly exert managerial power,
and some boards are perceived to have problems, but they appear to
be the exceptions. The No votes from shareholders
actually highlight those exceptions and put
pressure on boards to fix them. At the same time, the positive
shareholder votes for most companies seem
inconsistent with the view that CEO and top executive pay are driven largely by managerial power, rather again, the votes
are more consistent with a market based view
of top executive pay. Given the negative perceptions of CEO pay and
corporate governance, you might also think that corporate performance
has been poor. Let me conclude by
taking a look at that. US economy has gone through a financial crisis
and recession. The S&P 500 has declined
from its peak in 2007. At the same time, we saw
CEO pay has also declined. What's happened to the
operating performance of the S&P 500? When you look at that,
S&P 500 companies, it's the green line
on the top there, have weathered the downturn
surprisingly well. Media and operating margins, which is operating
income to sales, increased from '93-2007. They dropped in the crisis, but then recovered to their highest
levels in the period. Net debt also declined pretty substantially over this period. This includes some financials. The performance of
nonfinancial companies has been even stronger. On the average, particularly for
non-financial companies, average operating
performance has improved while average compensation
has declined. To summarize, I've
considered the evidence for three common perceptions of US CEO pay and
corporate governance: CEOs are overpaid and their
pay keeps increasing, CEOs are not paid
for performance, and boards do not penalize
CEOs for poor performance. The evidence is somewhat different from
those perceptions. While average CEO pay increased substantially through the '90s, it's declined since then, and CEO pay levels relative
to other highly paid groups today are comparable to their average levels
in the early 1990s. In fact, the relative pay for large company CEOs is pretty similar to where it
was in the 1930s. Furthermore, the ratio of large company CEO pay to
firm market value has remained roughly
constant since 1960. Second on average, CEOs are paid for
performance and penalized for poor performance. Finally, boards do
appear to monitor CEOs and that monitoring appears
to have increased over time. So Kevin Murphy
concludes what is a very impressive and
detailed survey of executive compensation
with the conclusion that executive compensation
is affected by an interaction of a
competitive market for talent, managerial power, and
political factors. That conclusion is very
hard to disagree with. There have been corporate
governance failures, for sure, there've been paid
outliers where managerial power is
surely exercised, and the pay levels
are very high. Those are sources of
the common perceptions. That said, a meaningful part of CEO pay appears to have been driven by the
market for talent. In recent decades, CEO pay is likely to have been
affected by the same forces of technology and
scale that have led to the general increase in
incomes at the very top. Now, for researchers, this still leaves a
number of questions. In particular, it would
be useful to quantify or nail down the relative
contributions of the market for talent, managerial power, and
other considerations. There's certainly
room for more work on understanding what incentives are appropriate under
what circumstances. For boards, the evidence
explains why compensation and the role of boards
are likely to remain challenging, if
not controversial. The market for talent puts
pressure on boards to reward their top people at
competitive pay levels in order to both attract
and retain them. At the same time, boards are affected by the accurate perception that
pay is high relative to the median household and by the negative publicity from
pay and governance outliers. These perceptions and the current
lackluster economy create political and
popular pressure to reward top people less. Thank you for your attention, and I look forward to any reactions you
might have. Thank you. MALE_1: Thank you very
much. We have time for some questions and answers, and I will let Steve open the floor and
take it from there. Steven Kaplan: Eric. Eric: You briefly
talked in the middle Steve: there about
how incomes have gone up from [inaudible]
percent, and you alluded to some forces
that maybe driving that. Could you elaborate a
little bit on what you see is behind that? Steven Kaplan: I
think the forces which you and I
talked about earlier, technology allows a CEO to look over a much larger corporation than he or she could have 10, 20, 30 years ago. It allows a trader or
investor can manage billions of dollars where
you couldn't have done that 20, 30 years ago. You see it in athletes. I didn't point that out here. Athletes have gone up, actually, a little bit
more than the CEOs. That's also
technology and scale. Technology scale, I
guess globalization, troll buzzwords, I can't nail that down other
than to say the fact that these increases are across all these different groups. It suggests it's
something that's, rather than being
governance-specific, it seems like it's a
more general phenomenon which obviously many
people have written about. Yes. MALE_2: The same question. About the distribution of
compensation [inaudible]. Steven Kaplan: The question
is, what's the proportion of stock-based versus fixed? Stock-based compensation
has increased markedly over this period, really starting in the '80s. That big jump up in the mid-'90s was a big
increase in option pay, and since the 2000
options have come down, and they've been replaced
by restricted stock, I think the majority is
restricted stock and options, so it's very much
equity-based, and much more so today than it was 30 years ago, where it
was much more cash-based. MALE_3: [inaudible] Steven Kaplan: So
the question is, it's this greater emphasis on shareholder value. Again, what's interesting here, is it's not unique to
the public company CEO, as it seems to be true across
these different groups. I suspect this could
very well have had something to do with what you've seen over time with the substitution of
technology that's certainly consistent
with what we see. Greg. Greg: The general theme
of what you're saying is that it makes sense to pay the top guys in this
super valuable organizations a lot to get the
right talent there. University presidents
also [inaudible] organizations, and they get paid
one-tenth as much. Does underpaying the President of University of Chicago and not getting good
talent up there? MALE_4: The President of NBR. Steven Kaplan: The
President of NBER was even manning the camera earlier. That's a
really good question. There is also this question, you don't see the CEOs
get paid as much in Germany or Japan as
in the United States. That's a much harder question, which I can't answer with this. What I can tell you
with this is that all these groups who are for-profits and motivated
for profit, it's systemic. The university presidents,
which is a very hard job, are paid less, and that's
not part of this group, although their pay has increased quite a bit over
the last 30 years on a relative basis. It's not clear
that you would see anything different
there. Yes, in the back. MALE_5: [inaudible] CEOs' pay
include severance payments? Steven Kaplan: The question
is about severance payments. No, it didn't include
severance payments. There's a nice paper, I think Goldman and
Huang, that looks at S&P 500 CEOs who've
lost their jobs, and the median severance for S&P 500 CEOs are reeling over the last 20 years. The median is zero. The average is, I think, four-and-a-half million dollars, which is about
half a year's pay, if you take the
$600 thousand value at risk, with about an eight
percent stock movements. Severance would affect
this a little bit, but the pay for performance, would not be affected
very much by sticking that in. Chester? Chester: Steve, you
commented that compensation doesn't have much of a relative
performance component. Could you elaborate
on that [inaudible] ? Steven Kaplan: I
misspoke on that. I shouldn't say I misspoke. There are people in this room, Lucian and Luigi would be two of them, who would say
that pay should be explicitly or some
portion of pay should be explicitly tied to
relative performance rather than the absolute
stock performance. Most companies don't do that, and it turns out there's a lot of variation. It's
cross-sectional. So when you look at
industry-adjusted performance, which we did, you find pay is definitely related to
industry-adjusted performance, but there is some sense in
which pay is related to industry performance or the general performance
of the market, which some people think.
and rightfully so. it's a little bit of a
puzzle because, as CEO, you can't control what the
overall stock market does. So that's the sense in which it will be a little
bit of a puzzle. Again, private equity investors don't make that adjustment. Some public companies
are pushing that way, but I'll leave it at that. There's clearly
compensation based on industry-adjusted
performance, but you also have the industry and the
market in there. Yes. FEMALE_1: I'm just curious in that first look you took at
the S&P public companies, did you happen to
just dice it up by financial versus
nonfinancial and [inaudible] later on in performance? Did you see whether there was a significant difference in pay for financial
institutions versus none? Steven Kaplan: The question is, were financial institutions different from the
nonfinancials, and what you see? Financials in the
S&P 500, I think they're about 15, 20 percent. It's less than 20.
It's more like 15. and the pay for the
financials went up by more, and now it's
come down by more. It's moved a little bit more with what
was happening in finance, which is, again, would be consistent with
a market for talent. Antoinette. Antoinette: [inaudible]. Steven Kaplan: The
question is explaining the level of differences
across countries. I agree with that completely that the US is higher, although not so much
higher as it used to be. The UK, actually to
some extent, caught up, and some of the other
countries did as well. But some of those level of
differences are puzzles. I think I'll just agree
with you and say, I don't have a good answer
for that. [inaudible] ? MALE_6: [inaudible]. Steven Kaplan: I think Kevin
Murphy has a paper where he has, with a couple
of co-authors, where they control for firm size and control
for other things, and they still find
a premium in the US. It's not as big as the premium you just compare by means, but it's still there. He adjusts for stock options and says they're riskier, and he actually gets it closer. But that argument is one that you may or may not agree with. It's 5:30, and I think it's
actually good. Thank you. 