Katherine Baicker: It's
really an honor to be here to give this
lecture and there's very little that I can add to the wonderful things that
you've heard about Marty, except to say that it's very
personal for me as well. I got to meet Marty my first
week of graduate school when he was assigned as my advisor and I
went to the NBER, which seemed like a
terrifying thing to do. I got to work with Marty as a research assistant and then
as a teaching assistant for AK1420 and eventually
I got to lecture with him in AK1420,
which was surreal. I remember throughout
graduate school, Marty's amazing dedication
to his students. He did so much. He was this world leader and advisor of presidents
and chancellors. I would occasionally get a
phone call from Jerry Johnson. I think I saw her in the room early and say Marty
would like to see you because it
had been a couple of weeks and I hadn't
gotten that much done. Marty was on top of this and cared so much about his
students success and the amount of time
and energy he devoted in so many of us for
our whole careers. I feel so lucky to have had
the opportunities that I have working at the Council
of Economic Advisers, working with corporate boards, working in different
universities. I know how important
Marty's support and sponsorship of me for
all of those activities was. I would not have had those
chances were Marty not the dedicated supporter that he is for the whole profession
and for me personally. I feel incredibly lucky to be here to have had the
experiences that I've had and particularly
honored to be able to give this
lecture this year. Without further ado, I want you to note
that the title for the lecture, thanks to Jim, calls on a title from one
of Marty's early papers, and I will draw on some of
Marty's work throughout this. I'm going to talk today
about the economics of evidence-based health
policy and how we have and haven't contributed
to driving forward a better dialogue on what really works in the health care
system and what doesn't. I'm going to start the lecture just by talking
about what I mean by evidence-based health
policy and then talk about our strengths and
weaknesses as a profession. Although of course, now
that I'm a dean I don't talk about anybody's
having any weaknesses, there are just opportunities
and challenges. Then I will highlight
some of the key issues in the current reform debate
and try to draw out the ways that the profession
has and has not been able to speak to what some
of those central issues are. We've had amazing
opportunities to draw out the features
of what seem like very disparate policies and bring analytical insights that
come from the strength of our economic toolkit and to highlight the
trade-offs that we face in making decisions about competing challenges
in health policy. There are winners and losers of every policy option on the
table and economics is a particularly adept set of
tools at highlighting what those trade-offs are even though we don't always see those discussed in the policy
debate in the same way. Of course, achieving
impact is not just about economics,
it's about economists. You can't see that
down in the bottom, but it's really about
economists and health policy. You know the old saying about
guns don't kill people. Economics doesn't
make good policy, economists make
good health policy. I'm going to start off
just by fixing ideas. What do I mean by
evidence-based health policy? You think this is
uncontroversial. Everyone is in favor of
evidence-based health policy, and we're against fraud
and were pro puppies, but it's not as uncontroversial
as it might sound. Because the minute economists
stand up in public and say, what does that actually cost? As you saw in some of
those wonderful cartoons, someone inevitably says, you can't put a price
on your health. Well, economists tend to be the skunk at the
garden party and say, not only can you put a
price on your health, you in particular want to
put a price on your health, which is not a very
popular thing to say, but you have to put
a price on health. Because you can't make
a decision about what's more important
investing in health, investing in kids education, investing in transportation
or infrastructure. If you're not
willing to quantify those things and
make trade-offs. That often sounds
cold-hearted, but of course, bringing evidence to bear, to direct resources
to where they actually produce the
most public good, I would argue is a much more compassionate
way to approach a problem than to just
take something that sounds like a good idea and pour a
lot of resources into it, whether it works or not. What do we mean by
each of these terms? First of all, policies
need to be specified. Slogans aren't
policies and we hear a lot of debate
about things like a single-payer
health care system or investing in
population health. Now, that can be a useful
rallying cry to draw out certain worldviews
that people have when they say they're in favor
of single-payer health, or they're in favor of
market-based answers. They're conveying a lot
of different things. What they're not conveying
is the details of a policy that you could
actually analyze. When you start to look
at something like single-payer health care
or Medicare for All, you realize that people
who say they're in favor may mean very
different things. When we say a
single-payer system, is it the Medicare program, is it Medicare fee for service, is it the Medicare
Advantage Plan? Is it a premium
support check that you can use to buy your
own private insurance? Those have very
different implications for the health care system. By peeling apart what
people actually mean, we can then evaluate with the policy on the table
achieve that goal or not. But if you're not specific, it can mask all ills underneath. Also, it's important to distinguish once you've
specified a policy, what goal you're trying to
achieve with that policy. People may be in favor of policies for very
different reasons and the evidence may
be then supportive or not supportive of
those different reasons. For example, there's a movement to pay more for
care coordination. You want to pay primary
care doctors so that they can manage patients health
care throughout the system. Well, if your goal is to improve the coordination of
care for chronic conditions, to keep diabetic
blood sugar under control or to reduce obesity, coordinating care seems
pretty important for that and there's some
evidence to support it. But if your goal is to lower health care spending by
reducing duplicated tests, by keeping people
out of the hospital, there's very little
evidence that paying for coordinated care
achieves that goal. If you're going to be in
favor of coordinating care, it better be for a reason that
supported by the evidence, not for another reason
that also sounds nice. Then the flip side
of that is that the same goal can be achieved
with multiple policies and figuring out which one
is most effective is really important in directing resources to where they're going
to do the most good. For example, that same paying
for care coordination. There may be other
ways to reduce bad coordination of
care and bad handoffs. Maybe instead of paying a primary care provider
to coordinate, you want to promote electronic health
records so that when patients go from site to site, whether they've had a test
or not goes along with them. That might be an equally
or more effective way to achieve that goal. Bringing evidence to bear
requires specifying what the policy is and what you're trying to achieve
through the policy. Now, evidence then. How do you bring
evidence to bear? Of course, economists
are notoriously bad at understanding what
actual human beings think, so our introspection is probably the least effective
way to approach this. We have all sorts of theories that predict the effects
of different policies, and those theories are
incredibly useful. It gives us an analytical
framework to be able to interpret often
conflicting evidence, and I'm going to
come back to that. But even with the
best of theory, even demand slopes
down, we're really, really sure of that one, it doesn't tell you the magnitude of the effects
you're likely to see. In so many policies situations, there are effects that go
in opposite directions, and so you really need empirical evidence to say
what the net effect on health care utilization
or management of diabetes or any one of a number of policies
is likely to be. We know we need data,
and then of course, no one study gives us the
answer to these questions. That's why we're all
still in business. Thank goodness, there's
still plenty of work to do in health policy. There's always a set of studies that speak to any given question and being able to
interpret that, the analytical
framework is really helpful for pulling
the pieces together. But the challenge that we face is interpreting
the evidence through a lens of the quality
of the underlying data, the generalizability
of the study, not based on our prior views about which policies are best. This is not a
universally held view. In economics land where I am
happy to live with you all, it's pejorative to call
something a piece of advocacy rather than
a piece of research. That's not the way
every discipline views the distinction between
advocacy and evidence. I like to think that keeping your own policy views
out of your reading of the evidence generates
a better body of evidence and makes you a more reliable reporter to translate
research to policymakers. I think there's a real
strength in policymakers not necessarily knowing what
your personal views are when they read
your research. When I read an article
and I say, well, the author of this
study is clearly in favor of policy x because
of a set of preferences, that undermines, in my view, the persuasiveness
of the research, and I think policymakers really value that as a profession, we have a reputation for being
able to translate work in a way that separates out preferences from what the
evidence actually says. Well, does that actually work? That all sounds nice. Sometimes it's true,
but there's of course a reality of
political constraints, and that's another
important thing in generating evidence
that's actually useful, is we have all of these
budget constraints and other first-order
conditions, second-order conditions, political constraints have
to enter into that calculus. This is one of the things
that Marty was so adept at, was understanding what are the first-order concerns that people have and how do policies actually play out in reality
and letting that shape an analysis of the options that are actually on the table. This is one of Marty's more recent working
papers on the topic, and because NBER has
gone all digital, I had to color it yellow
because I couldn't find the little yellow
jackets anymore. But I colored it
yellow and imbalancing the goals of
healthcare provision. He was an expert at being able to pull together these
different threads and say, what does it say on net? Now as a profession, we have a number of strengths in this, as a discipline, we have
a number of strengths. We have a really
high causal bar, and that is an incredibly
valuable thing to be able to differentiate between
associations and correlations, and what we can really identify as the causal effect
of different policies. We're really good
at pulling apart other people's arguments
that healthy skepticism, I think it is a
wonderful treatment for everything that
sounds like a good idea, deserve support, impulse that I think that we all
feel as humans. Now, we also have this deep understanding
of markets and of incentives and how we pay for things drives
what we end up getting, and that's going to be
particularly important in the healthcare example
that I'll go through, but also of the
incidents of things. The way you write down a
tax rate on paper does not necessarily translate
to who pays the tax rate. The price that you write
down as a gross price is not necessarily the net
price that people pay. Understanding the true incidence of these policies
gives insight into distributional
consequences that I think might otherwise
go unnoticed. Now, of course, we have some shortcomings
as a profession as well. When advising policymakers,
it's hard to put aside that academic lens that we spend all of our time on
as academic researchers. There's a very different set of expectations once you
translate to the policy world, it's helpful to
be more decisive. Nobody wants to hear
the 1800s caveats that we normally expect
in an academic paper. It's also helpful
to be timely if results come out years
after the policy debate, we may be really sure of
the answer and it may be much too late to
impact legislation. Putting aside
second-order concerns and focusing on
first-order problems, again goes against
the grain of what makes for a successful
academic paper, but it is crucial for
successful policy influence. Then last,
translational efforts, being able to spend the time to take something
that is perfectly comprehensible to
somebody else with the same academic background and bring it to
other disciplines, or bring it to the policy world, that takes time away from other things that
you might be doing, and there's not a
lot of reward in it, especially for junior
researchers and being able to spend the time to make
something into a white paper, to write an op-ed, to spend time translating to
reporters and policymakers. That means one fewer paper
that you're going to write. Making that trade-off is something that's
very hard to do, and something I think
about especially now from a policy school
lens where you think the whole raison d'etre
of a policy school is to have some impact
on public policy. Can we be advising junior
people to spend time doing that instead of just getting one more paper before
it's time for tenure, I don't think we have a
great answer for that. Now I want to turn to the
current policy debate. I want to highlight two goals
that a lot of people have when they discuss
health policy reforms. There are, allocative
goals and there are productive goals in terms of driving more efficient
health care delivery. Allocation, access to care
and coverage in some ways, that's the easy one. One of the main goals
of health reform was to expand insurance to
cover more people. We know how to do
that pretty well. You can expand Medicaid, you can give subsidies
for private insurance. You can have a mandate. It can come with a penalty. There are lots of
trade-offs in those, but we have a much
better sense of how that works to expand coverage. Where there is a little less
reason in the discourse, is the rationale for doing that. I think it would be easier
if we were trying to expand insurance because it
somehow benefited everyone. I'm better off if
Jim is ensured. Well, you could say, Jim could be spreading disease and if he's insured
and he gets treated, then I'm not going
to get his cuties. That does not seem like a very persuasive rationale
for expanding insurance. Fundamentally expanding
insurance to people who can't afford to buy it on
their own is about altruism, and it forces a
real wrestling with the distributional preferences
that drive that policy. Redistribution as a matter
of preferences rather than something that
the data can speak to, and there's a lot of
discussion about whether healthcare is a right or
not in today's debate. That's the wrong
question in my view, and that health care
is not one thing. When we talk about
a right to housing, we usually talk about a right to adequate housing
or when you think about food stamps it so that
people won't go hungry. If we think of
healthcare as one thing, do you have a right
to it or not? That spans a very different
debate from if you say, how much health care
do we want to be sure that even
low-income people have? How much redistribution
do we want to do? Until you're willing
to unpack that, I think you can't answer
the tough questions of what public insurance
should look like. How much should be subsidized, not just who should
be subsidized. I think it's helpful
to fix ideas about where we are in health
insurance coverage. The vast majority of people in America still get their insurance
through their employer. We know this is the relic
of the tax code and that this is preferred relative to other forms of compensation. You get a lot of public discussion about
insurance premiums on the health insurance exchanges
and how well they're functioning and whether they're
going to implode or not. It's worth noting, there it is, that that is actually a very
small share of the market. That little sliver is
health insurance exchanges. It's important a
lot of those people were not insured otherwise, and there's a real discussion about how different forms of public insurance
expansion may or may not crowd out
other insurance. But I think that that gets a disproportionate
share of the discourse. The ACA in 2014, you can see a pretty
sharp drop off in the share of the population
that was uninsured. I think born out
in all analyses, It's worth noting that
there is still a pretty widespread in insurance coverage based on demographic
characteristics, based on the states
in which people live. There has been a huge gain in the number of people
having insurance, but it has not been
uniformly felt. That first goal, I think is much easier
to wrestle with than the second goal of
improving the efficiency of healthcare delivery or the
production of health care. There is very little
disagreement that we spend a lot of money
on health care. But there's a lot
less discussion on how we can improve the value that we get
out of the system. As an economist, there are all those questions you
get on the plane like, what stock should I invest in? My answer to that
is always, if I knew I wouldn't be
with you in coach. Then people say, I say, no, I'm not that kind of economist. I'm a health
economist, They say, so how much of GDP should we
be spending on health care? The answer is, I don't know. It depends how much would be efficient to spend
and we don't live in a world where we're allocating our resources all
that efficiently. We're spending pushing
close to 20 percent of GDP on health care. Is that too much? Well, not if we were
living forever, that'd be pretty good. It's easy to spend less money
on health care if you just eliminate big public
programs like Medicare, you spend a lot less
money on health care. But nobody would
argue that that's good policy because in fact, health insurance is really
good for people's health, as I'll get to in a second, and big programs like Medicare and nobody would
suggest eliminating. Rather we should be focusing
the debate on how we can actually get more health
for every dollar we spend. Now that doesn't mean the
share of GDP is irrelevant. As we know, the amount
of money that we publicly fund drives
deadweight loss, and it's a real constraint for policymakers to know
how much you would have to raise taxes to pay for 30 percent of GDP if half of it is coming
through public programs. It's really important to
understand how we finance this. Where's the money come
from? Where does it go? This is sources of
spending for health care, most of our dollars are coming
from private insurance. Here too, is worth noting that that bottom layer there is
out of pocket spending. There's been a lot
of discussion about the rising share of spending
that's coming out of pocket. It looks pancake flat though. What is happening with that? Well, that flat level, I think masks two different
things that are going on. We're getting a lot more
people covered by Medicaid, which has very low cost sharing. At the same time then employer plans are introducing
more cost sharing. There is a change in
the composition there, but the debate is probably
still disproportionate. If you look at the public
attention focused on out of pocket spending versus what's going on with our
public programs, it's a remarkably stable share. In terms of where the
money goes, again, it's very interesting to
contrast the pattern with where we actually see the
public discourse that, my little arrows aren't
working very well. The next to top slice is
prescription drug spending. Where again, you
can see the share doesn't look like it's
growing all that fast. It's growing faster
than other shares, and there are lots
of good reasons to focus the debate on
prescription drug spending. But it's worth noting that list prices look very
different from net prices and the profession is working
hard to accumulate the additional data that would
help us tease that apart. But the bulk of our
health care dollars are going to hospitals
and physicians. There's just not a lot of
attention being paid to how we can rein those in or how much value we're getting
out of those as well. Now we spend a lot more
than other countries. This is dollars per capita. The graph looks almost the same if you look at share of GDP or even if you adjust for income differences
across countries. Why do we spend so much more
than those other countries? This is another great example of where the analytical
framework of economics has actually helped
to inform the discourse. First thing that you want
to do when you think about total spending is decompose it into prices and quantities. We know that spending is
price times quantity, and there's a wide literature
coming from lots of different disciplines looking at how much is prices and
how much is quantities. You would think this
would be a pretty easy decomposition to do, but it's not because
quality is very hard to measure and if you
can't measure quality, you can't measure quantity, and if you can't measure
quantity and you're saying, well, let's see which
part is pricing, which part is quantity, you're decomposition is
already problematic. It's really hard
to measure quality because a night in the
hospital means something very different in
a more intensive setting versus a less
intensive setting. Even if you could
measure quality, though suppose we
had great measures of prices and quantities, and the answer, despite [inaudible] it's very
memorable paper, it's the price is stupid. I still think it's some of each, which probably means
I'm really stupid, but I think it's some of each, even though the quantities
are hard to measure, but that doesn't tell me what
policy I want to implement. You can't really have
a policy that says, there shall be lower prices without having a profound
effect on quantity. It's interesting to look
at surveys of the public, public opinion polls, where they ask people what's wrong with the health care
system and people say, I want prices to be lower. Well, yes, if you could
get all the same stuff, but pay half as much, I vote for that too. It's just that it's
not in our choice set. Because when you
change the prices, the quantities are likely
to change as well. Understanding the
underlying source of variation in
price or quantity is it because of differences in the competitive landscape
on the provider side, is it because of differences in insurance coverage on
the patient's side? Understanding those
fundamentals is crucial to then
being able to make good policy about
how you might want to change the marketplace in which these things
are happening, or the subsidies for different
activities that would result in changes in prices
or changes in quantities. All of that is about how much we spend on health care but I started off by saying we
should care a lot about value, not just how much
we're spending. Again, it's really
hard to measure the health that each of
those dollars produces. I spent several years in
my career at Dartmouth, so I'm contractually
obligated to put up maps everywhere I go. This first map is showing us how much Medicare spends for
fee for service enrollees. They have the same
Medicare benefit. In different parts of
the country you can see that it varies by
a factor of two. This is adjusting for age, sex, race, price levels. There's just huge
variation in how much of the same insurance
program spends. On the right, you see how often Medicare beneficiaries
are discharged from the hospital for ambulatory
care sensitive conditions. You can think of these as bad discharges where people shouldn't have been in the
hospital in the first place. If they gotten
better primary care, they wouldn't have had
to be hospitalized. Think of that as a marker of inadequate primary
care provision. If you look at that,
you can squint and do the regression in your heads. That's what year three of
grad school is all about, and you can see that those are correlated such that
the parts of the country where we spend the most are the parts of
the country where Medicare beneficiaries
are the least likely to get that
adequate primary care. Now, we're probably
not spending money for the purpose of avoiding giving diabetic
patients eye exams, something else is going on. This correlation isn't telling
us the underlying problem, nor does it tell us what
the policy should be. It's tempting to say
geographic variation is bad, we should stamp that out. But, of course, leveling down versus leveling up
looks very different. The answer shouldn't be a policy targeting
geographic variation, although that's exactly what
we got out of these maps. But the answer is
probably understanding the underlying causes of the geographic variation and the likely inefficiency
that they signal. Now we're also seeing wide variation in
private spending as well and there's new data that economists have pulled
together to be able to assess the degree to which private payers have
huge variation in spending across areas. I should have said
at the beginning, I'm criminally under
citing because everybody in this room has generated all of
this literature, and I realize I just didn't have the time to call out
all of the papers, so you should all consider yourselves really well
cited in all of this. Each one of you produce
all of these papers. Really, it points
to the importance of how we pay for health
care as a key driver. I'm going to talk briefly
about the patient side levers, the provider side levers, and the competitive marketplace
in which they do or don't interact as avenues for trying to drive towards
higher value spending, and then I'm going
to try to wind down. Again this was the earliest
NBER paper that I could find of Marty's and it's the effect of national
health insurance on price and quantity. Marty, early on was one of
the promoters of thinking about how we pay for value instead of paying for
quantity of care. In terms of expansion, I showed you that the
ACA expanded the number of insured people pretty
substantially in 2014. Now, most of that came from Medicaid expansions
rather than from some of the other avenues like
the exchanges or through the coverage of dependence or the expanded
coverage of dependence. Although those were
important as well. We have an experiment going
on now in understanding how powerful a mandate is
with and without a penalty, because, the underlying
economics would suggest that a mandate that has no
penalty doesn't do anything. Behavior economics says people actually pay attention
to those mandates. In fact, not only the
people who are mandated, but other people who hear about it come out of the
woodwork as well. There's something to that and I'll come back to that in a sec. These different
mechanisms, Medicaid, private insurance, they look different as insurance products. They have different
types of coverage and they have
different implications for whether healthy
people are likely to be insured in the pool, sick people are
likely to be insured. How much risk pooling there is. All of that plays out
very differently based on the subsidies and the underlying pricing
of the insurance. Like most things, the
effects of expanding coverage are
theoretically ambiguous. That is my actual mug from my first internship at the
Congressional Budget Office, I was so excited to get that mug and that is the only
form of payment that I received for my hours of most
excellent alphabetizing. Super diligent. But of course,
expanding insurance can have lots of different
effects, costs, and benefits nice buckets
that we put things in, the main cost of
expanding insurance or subsidizing that expansion is
increased health care use. Now, most non-economists
don't think of increased health
care use as a cost, they think of that as the
point of expanding insurance, that's why we have these
programs in the first place, but of course, nobody
actually wants health care, people want health
and health care, the resources you expand
to get that health, if we could get the health for
fewer health care dollars, that'll be a good thing. Now, I just spent a
little time saying how demand slopes down and
being really proud of myself, so you would think
this seems really obvious that when you
expand insurance, you took something that was
expensive and you made it free and therefore you should
see more health care use. On the other hand, people make the argument that the uninsured use health
care really inefficiently, and then if you
expand insurance, you can get people out of the emergency department
into primary care, there'll be so much healthier
they can go back to work and pay taxes and it
all pays for itself. There are arguments
that people make that are not atheoretical, that expanding insurance
could actually reduce health care
spending in the long run. Now on the benefit side, there are two main benefits, one of which is really underappreciated in
the reform debate, and that's insurance
is supposed to protect you against
financial risk. Having health insurance policy should not only get you
access to health care, but she keeps you from getting evicted from your
apartment because you couldn't pay your rent because you've had a hospital bill
and this is one of the frustrations of listening to the current reform debate
is people say things like, my health insurance
plan was useless, so I didn't even use it at
all and you think I don't say my homeowners insurance was useless because my
house didn't burn down, I'm just glad my house
didn't burn down. But with health insurance, people don't see the
insurance protection value of it upfront, and similarly, insurance is about risk
pooling and people say, well, the people who need
health insurance the most are the sick and uninsured. It's a little too late to get insurance once you are
sick and uninsured, you don't need health insurance, you need health care and
that's a very different thing. Understanding the
insurance value of insurance ought to inform the debate about the value of expanding Medicaid or
what Medicare looks like, but then, of course,
the real punchline is what happens to people's health and does it actually change health outcomes. Now, again, for each of these, there are theoretical reasons that could go in
either direction. In terms, especially
with Medicaid, where you might think
that the uninsured have very little opportunity
to consume health care, they're just not
getting a lot of health care and in fact,
once you have Medicaid, maybe you have more access, maybe you can incur more debt once you have access
to providers, so for each of these, you actually need to see the
data to know what happens and a lot of different strategies for
answering these questions. I gave myself one Oregon slide, which seems fair,
I put a lot on it, but it just one Oregon slide. Think about the effects of expanding insurance
on these costs and benefits and what we found in the Oregon health
insurance experiment, where we had this
opportunity to take advantage of a
lottery and Oregon to allocate a limited number of available spots and Medicaid, we think of these randomized
controlled trials as the gold standard. Amy told me a story
of telling Marty this we have this new
gold standard approach, Marty saying the gold
standards, bad fair point. This really good way of
isolating the causal effect of expanding insurance and what we found was, in some ways, I think consistent
with what people expected and in some
ways less consistent, the consistent part is that Medicaid did in fact expand
people's health care use, they were more likely
to go to the doctor, they use more
prescription drugs, they got more preventive care, but they also went to the
emergency department more. I think that this was
surprising to a lot of public policy analysts
who were really hanging their hat on Medicaid, reducing emergency
department use, getting the uninsured out of the ED and into the
doctor's office. Now, to put it back into our
usual economics framework, what you're implicitly
saying when you think that expanding Medicaid is going to reduce emergency department use, is that cross-price elasticities are bigger than own
price elasticities, by which I mean, you took
something that was expensive, the emergency department,
you made it free, that should make people
want to go more, but then people on the
other side say, wait, you also took the doctor's
office and made it free. That makes people go to
the doctor's office more, if these are really
strong substitutes, then the net effect could be a reduction in emergency
department use. We find no evidence that
having Medicaid makes them more substitutable
and in fact, we find that the increase in emergency department
use persists for at least the first 2.5 Years in which people have
this new insurance plan. It looks like making the emergency department free was the dominant effect there, but this goes along with people being much more
financially secure. Just because you can go to the emergency department
when you were uninsured, didn't mean you didn't
get a giant bill at the end of it and in fact, when people got Medicaid, they were 25 percent less likely to have a bill
sent to collection, which is a really bad
outcome for people. When you have a bill
sent to collection, you not only have
a black mark on your credit report for
getting a mortgage, but for renting an
apartment or getting a job, this is a really bad
outcome for people that was averted by
having Medicaid. But then the
punchline on health, what actually happened to
people's health outcomes when they got Medicaid? Well, there's a bit
of a mixed bag there, their rates of depression
dropped substantially, which is a major health
improvement for a population where depression was a
substantial unmet health needs, but we didn't see any
detectable improvements in blood pressure in cholesterol in diabetic blood sugar control. It looks like those
are much harder to manage and that
a Medicaid policy alone is not sufficient
for bringing those back to normal levels, so I'm going to come
back to what all of that means for health policy, but spend a minute on what we
think cost-sharing does for patient outcomes
and what it does for patient health
care utilization. Now again, theory tells us
some very strong things about what copayments should look like in a health
insurance plan, it should balance
the insurance value of having protection
against financial risk with the moral hazard that
comes along with using more health care services
when they are free as we saw, even the term moral
hazard I think means something
very different in English than it does in economics and that's
challenging to convey, but we have some
strong ideas about how copayments should be structured to balance those
competing effects. Medicare has surprisingly lousy financial
protection on its own, a basic Medicare
plan, parts A and B, leaves people exposed to almost
unlimited financial risk, which is why most people have a Medigap plan or a wraparound
plan that keeps them from being exposed to
any financial risk and that limits policy
options on the table. Of course, they're also
well-known distortions on the employer side, where because employer-sponsored
health insurance is favored in the tax code, people have first coverage
with very little cost sharing, although that's
starting to change, that drives excess utilization. That suggests the importance of removing that
employer-sponsored insurance preference and this is my, another example of where
economists agree on something, but it takes a little bit to
translate it into policy, this is one of the
few examples where economists on the left
and the right all agree. The current system
makes no sense, we favor employer-sponsored
insurance with low copayments relative to all the
other things that people might want in forms
of compensation. This is inefficient because
it drives excess utilization, but it's also really
regressive because it favors people with the
most generous plans, the highest incomes, and the highest
income tax brackets, so there are very few options
where you can both improve efficiency and improve
distribution with one policy, so economists also,
you got to fix that. But that just sounds wrong when you stand
up and say to people the solution to your
excess health care costs is taxing your health
insurance benefits, it's going to make
everything better. Just does not sound
right and in fact, it went over like a
led balloon until somebody had the genius
idea to say, oh no, we're not taxing the holders
of expensive benefits, we're taxing the insurers who issue that and people thought, that is right, I
hate my insurer. Thus the Cadillac tax was born, not really having the durability
that one might expect. Although it's back in the
debate again, saying, is this actually
going to come into effect in the next few years
as it was supposed to? There's a lot of
distributional politics that goes on in that, running into headlong into
policy versus politics again. I am going to just say a sentence about the
behavioral approach to this. I've talked about how we
might optimally structure cost sharing in the
traditional economics model. There is mounting evidence that does not adequately
capture how people behave. We see overuse of healthcare, we see underuse of healthcare. Overuse sounds consistent
with moral hazard. It's hard to explain underuse of things that have
enormous health benefit. We see five dollar copays
dissuading people from using things like anti organ
rejection medications, when people have had
transplants or medicines that avert heart attacks and have
very limited side effects. If five dollars is dissuading
you from using those, something in our traditional
rational agent model is not capturing people's
behavior all that well. That suggests an alternate
raft of policies, not just high
deductible health plans or alternative payment models, but also potentially
value-based insurance design, safe harbors for
certain kinds of care. These are all fundamentally
motivated by paternalism, but match what we see in actual behavior much more
closely than the usual models. Providers are price
sensitive too. We see overuse of things like antibiotics for ear infections
on the patient side, we also see providers being very sensitive to the reimbursement that they get for
different procedures, and acting like human beings as well where providers
are much more likely to provide antibiotics for ear
infections where they are not warranted at the end of a long shift than
at the beginning. They get fatigue with just
saying, no to patients. If we could line up
patient incentives and provider incentives, we could probably promote
more efficient use of healthcare both by stemming
overuse and underuse. I'm going to zip
ahead a little bit. Economists, you heard about Marty's forays
into new fields and setting up whole
new endeavors of applying the economic
toolkit to new policy areas. Economists are starting to pay a lot more attention to
healthcare delivery, working with physicians and other clinicians to
try to think about how we can inject the right incentives into
that resource allocation. We're using a lot
more randomized controlled trials and
clinical settings, which is a wonderful
opportunity, but opens up the need to communicate those results
in a different way. I want to end with the thought, does all the evidence that we're accumulating on
the patient side, on the provider side, actually change the debate? These are all headlines
from newspapers. The day after one particular
Oregon paper came out. This was the paper that
had that mixed bag of findings on the
clinical outcomes. Some of the headlines are
saying that Medicaid works, some are saying
Medicaid is terrible. My favorite one is
that one right there. How do you use the
Oregon Medicaid study to your ideological advantage? Is like, wow, I'm glad
somebody actually said it out loud because
it's frustrating. Looking at Amy who spent years of our lives and millions of other people's dollars to try to generate all of this evidence, and then this is what you get. You might think,
well, wait a minute. What is it all for? On the other hand though, these are some headlines
from long before the study. Just examples of things
that people were saying, they were unduly optimistic, and things that were unduly pessimistic about the
value of Medicaid. If you naively look at the mortality rate
of people who are on Medicaid versus the uninsured, people on Medicaid have
a higher mortality rate. Is this because Medicaid is
killing them? Probably not. You get on Medicaid by being poor and being poor is
bad for your health. That seems like an unduly
pessimistic thing to say. That people who are
on Medicaid are worse off than if
they were uninsured. My little animations
aren't working very well. We can eliminate that
unduly pessimistic view. People who are on Medicaid are substantially better off
than if they were uninsured. They have better access to care, better self-reported
health, lower rates of depression, more
financial security. They say their health
is much better. But we can also eliminate the unduly optimistic
view of the program, which is it's so wonderful that it's going to
get people out of the emergency department
and back to work and we're actually all
going to save money. When you expand
public insurance, you don't save money. People use more care
and that costs money. You have to find a
way to finance that, which is going to pit
interests against each other. I return then to
the strengths of the approach that we bring
to these thorny trade-offs. The people who are better off, Medicaid enrollees
are different from the people who are paying
for the program, taxpayers. Not exclusively, but
for the most part, these are the interests
of two different groups and you have to weigh
them against each other, and that requires an
analytical framework. Now, I think we've
had more success than one might feel from just looking at
the latest tweets. If you look there,
there's in fact a new law focused on foundations for evidence-based policy
making that came out of a commission that economists
played a key role in. You hear lots of
congressional testimony, you see people cited in
Supreme Court cases. Of course, I'm speaking about our profession
because we're all here. This is clearly not unique
to economics and it's a broader statement about
evidence-based decision-making. There's some hope, but oxygen is scarce for
this kind of debate. I cut that brings me back to end on the amazing role model that Marty really
was for all of us. It's an aspirational ideal to be able to educate students, to be able to educate
policymakers, to be able to move
back and forth between cutting edge
academic scholarship, policy advice, and dissemination through
broad media sources. Marty really embodied
that rare combination of abilities that I know I strive for a
little bit every day and I suspect most of the
people in the room do as well. Some days are good days, some days are less good days, but because of Marty
and the bureau, we all have the resources and
the network to be able to strive towards that
very worthy ambition. I will stop there and
take a handful of questions until Jim says it's time for everybody
to get dinner. 