Nathan Foley-Fisher:
This paper is part of a larger project in
which we're trying to use life insurers in order to understand aspects of the
shadow banking system, which really hasn't been
explored all that much at all. In particular, in this paper, what we're exploring
is something called securities lending. I'm going to get into
the mechanics of securities lending
in a little bit. But before I get
there, I just want to try to put it in the
simplest possible terms. What is the question that
we're exploring in this paper? So US life insurers
tend to lend bonds against cash collateral in a process called
securities lending. What they do with that cash
collateral is reinvest it. One way that they
can reinvest it is in long-term assets. They're lending
bonds short-term, and they're
re-investing long term. That is maturity mismatch. This is a bank like activity. What we're trying
to understand in this paper is whether insurers maturity mismatches what drives their securities
lending programs. To preempt the main result, we find that a one standard
deviation increase in maturity mismatch
raises the likelihood that a given bond is lend
by 11 percentage points. Before I get into the details of how we arrive
at that estimate, I just want to tell you why you should care about that
particular result. In general, when the
academic literature thinks about securities lending, it doesn't think about it as an activity which involves
maturity mismatch. It tends to think that it's driven by the
security borrower. The secured lender receives the cash and it's
going to reinvest it back in short-term markets
such as GC, tri-party repo. If you think about Krishnamurthy, Nagel,
Orlov JF paper in 2014, that's really what
they're trying to study. They're thinking about the tri-party repo market as associated with
securities lenders. But of course, maturity mismatch renders the life insurers
vulnerable to runs. If you think about AIG
during the financial crisis, AIG securities
lending program had only 20 percent of
its reinvestment in liquid securities. Of course, AIG experienced run, ended up biggest bailout in
history. We know that story. But perhaps what you don't
know is that that was commonplace throughout the securities
lenders at that time. It had a consequential
effect on funding markets that were derived from securities lending,
cash reinvestment. In particular, the
tri-party repo funding from securities lending collapsed by $300 billion in the
fourth quarter of 2008. If you want to understand the risks associated
with securities lending, you need to understand why security lenders might be engaged in this
particular activity. You need to understand in the shadow banking system as a whole where maturity
mismatch arises. If that's where we're going and why, how are we
going to do that? What you'd like to do
if you think about what the ideal empirical
experiment would be for trying to get at
securities lending being driven by
maturity mismatch, you can imagine
two life insurers with identical bond portfolios. One of them were exogenously engaged in more
maturity mismatch. We'd like to see how their propensity to lend
particular bonds of those portfolios change with respect to that
exogenous variation in maturity mismatch. That's what we're
going to try to do. To do that, we collected
regulatory data, which has only been available since 2011, on a quarterly, sometimes annual basis on the bond level loan decisions at year-end and what they're reinvesting the cash collateral
that they receive in. We're going to combine that with some transaction level data on the securities lending
market as a whole. That is going to allow us, we think, to overcome the two critical identification challenges inherent
to this exercise. One is the unobservable demand
for security borrowing. The other is the
fact that we don't see everything about
these life insurance. Some unobservable
heterogeneity in lender types are in their ability to lend
these securities. If that's the roadmap for
how we get about doing this, I'm guessing that a
lot of people are still wondering what
is security lending? This is a simplified securities
lending transaction. You think about the
securities lender as being an institution
that holds a lot of securities on its portfolio for regulatory or
business reasons, can't sell those securities, but it can lend them. The securities
borrower wants it for shorting positions or
covering naked short, for example, is going to take
full economic ownership of that security in exchange for cash or non-cash collateral. Collateral is going to
be mark-to-market daily. It's going to be
over collateralized. In the US, about 80 percent is going to be cash collateral. The securities lender then has a decision about what to do with that so it can invest
long-term or short-term. In addition, the contract written with the securities
borrower promises or rebate, which is going to
be paid back from the securities lender to the securities
borrower based off of GC repo as a percentage of the cash provided to
the securities lender. That's called a
rebate. The negative of the rebate is proportional
to something called specialists relative to how it compares to the GC repo rate. For those of you who
are familiar with them, that looks a lot like
a repo transaction. But one major difference with
a repo transaction is that either party is
going to be able to end that lending
relationship at anytime. If that's a basic security
lending transaction, we want to know
how that fits into the overall map of the
shadow banking system. In particular, how
cash reinvestment is going to tie back to
this securities borrower. Here's a simplified
stylistic diagram of a shadow banking system. What do you think about
the Cloud on the right as being a general functioning
of securities market. I'm illustrating it here
with a hedge fund taking a short position by borrowing the security through
a broker dealer. It's going to contract
with a position with respect to hedge fund long through that securities market. The hedge fund long
itself is going to be funding to position with funds that are borrowed through the broker-dealer off
of short-term markets. Think tri-party repo. Tri-party repo is
going to be provided by money market mutual
funds, that cash through tri-party repo to
the broker dealer is going to come from somebody like money market mutual funds. But it can also come back around from securities lenders. Take some portion of the cash, reinvest it back in
short-term markets. That's the world of
Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov. Alternatively, they can
invest that cash long term. They can create that
maturity mismatch. You can see how if the hedge fund taking
a short position, returns the security
and demands its cash back from the
securities lender. The first thing the security's
lender is going to do, is going to go to the
short-term market and pull back out its cash. That's the collapse that you see during the financial crisis. What you're worried
about is to what extent that transaction
is being driven by the securities
lender as opposed to being driven by the hedge fund. If the security lenders
simply invested everything in the short-term market so that it's borrowing short
and lending short, this whole mechanism could
simply scale up and down. No problem. The problem arises when it can't liquidate its positions in the
long term market. That's what we're
worried about. How are we going to get at this
in terms of the data? We have detailed
statutory filings since 2011 on individual securities at the end of year of whether
or not they're on loan. We also know something about the securities that they
reinvested that caching. We know about the type of
security that it's invested in and we know something about the residual maturity associated
with that reinvestment. We're going to try to
say something about how maturity mismatch on insurers cash reinvestment
portfolio is going to be related to their
decision to lend particular securities
knowing that we can observe everything on the
insurer's portfolio in terms of what it
could or could not done we're going to combine
that with detailed data on transactions in the securities lending
market as a whole. We also have data on information about the bonds themselves, but this is relatively
minor compared to the two major datasets
that we're interested in. If you think about
the regression that we would want to run, we would put something
that binary variable for whether or not you're lending a bond on the left-hand side. You want to put some measure of maturity mismatch on
the right-hand side. To give you a sense of what that maturity
mismatch looks like. I want you to
consider this figure. In blue what we're
showing you is the weighted average maturity of the cash collateral received
across insurance companies, these boxplots are distributions for each insurance company
is equally weighted. From the upper part of
the box to the top line, is representing 25 percent of the insurance companies in the industry engaged
in securities lending. What you can see from the
blue distribution is that the weighted average
maturity of cash collateral received is a short-term. But you can see
from the pink bars is that the weighted
average maturity of reinvested cash
collateral is far longer. Not only is there a
considerable variation within those pink boxes, but if you were to calculate the weighted average maturity, where the first weights are the size of those
insurance companies, the weighted average maturity is going to be something
like 900 days. You're getting something like a three-year maturity
mismatch by this metric. Going back to that design again where you have
the lending decision on the left-hand side and
you have something like maturity mismatch
on the right-hand side, what you're really interested
in trying to do is to control for borrower demand. That's your main objective here. The problem is you might
think as a natural first step is to use some variable from the market for
example that rebate. Some notion of price for example as a control for
borrower demand. The problem with that is
that it's endogenous. Not only is it endogenous
with respect to the market as a whole
but the security lender themselves typically
has market power over that particular
security that they own. We're providing some evidence
that that is the case. We don't just take it as given. We go into the data
and show you that the lending decision
and the rebate which exists within the market
are jointly determined. That joint determination
is exhibited at both the bond level and also
at the portfolio level. What that means is
that you cannot use market level
variables to control for borrower demand
in our regressions, simply cannot do that. But that's a non-trivial result, I want to underscore that. How do you do it instead? We're going to exploit
the fact that we have entire portfolios of these insurance companies
and we're able to observe the same bond across
multiple insurers. Multiple insurers who are making the same decision about
whether or not to lend with variation in their own
individual maturity mismatch on the cash reinvestment
portfolios. We're going to
include security time fixed effects to absorb all of the variation associated with a given security at a
particular point in time. Any variation in
demand associated with that security is just going to end up in
that fixed effect. What we're going to
be interested in is the coefficient on what
we're measuring as maturity mismatch which in this case is going to be
the fraction of insurer's cash reinvestment
portfolio that has a residual maturity of
more than one year. There's a specific reason
why we're using that metric and I'm going to
explain it a little bit later. But essentially, it
relates to the extent to which other institutions can
participate in this market. If that's the regression
that we want to run, what did we find? We get a strong significant
positive association between maturity mismatch
and securities lending. This is going to
hold just when we have straightforward insurer or fixed effects but it's also going to be hold when
we control for demand. That's not enough to make
a causal statement about whether maturity
mismatch is what is driving security's
lending. Why not? Because maturity
mismatch itself may not be uncontaminated by unobservable
lender heterogeneity. In particular,
what we're worried about is that individual bonds themselves may not be the level at which
demand is being driven. What we know from
the industry is that sets of bonds
are often borrowed. Sets of bonds are borrowed and put together by broker-dealers on behalf of hedge
funds who want to shorten tire indices. If you're worried about
the composition of bond holdings or you're
worried about lender ability, whether or not they're
lending desk is particularly good in
some years or others, then you have to worry about the maturity mismatch
variable that we've put on the right-hand
side of our regression. What we want is some
exogenous variation in the maturity mismatch that a particular insurer
wants to achieve. The way that we're
going to do it is through instrumental
variables. The particular
instrumental variable that we're going to use is the annual change in
unrealized losses as a fraction of total assets. This is again part of the
regulatory filings of insurance companies
where they are forced to mark-to-market and report
the mark-to-market value of their portfolio as a whole. If you are a manager
of that portfolio and you worry about the losses associated with that portfolio, and these unrealized losses
I should point out are a good predictor of actual economic losses
on the portfolio. Then one way that
you can attenuate those losses is by increasing the return
on cash reinvestment. In other words, by lengthening the maturity mismatch on your securities
lending program. The exclusion restriction
that we have in mind is that this aggregate variable is not related to the ability to
lend a particular security. This is what we find. In
a first-stage regression, the correlation between
unrealized losses and maturity mismatch is strong, significant and in
a second stage we find a positive statistically
significant coefficient. We do a bunch of robustness
checks to make sure that the coefficient is
reasonably stable. Conditional on a number of other factors that
you may have in mind. We can talk about those later. In terms of interpretation, that coefficient is precisely the result that I
reported before. That is a one standard
deviation exogenous increase in the fraction of cash
reinvestment portfolio with a residual maturity
of more than one year. On average is going to
increase the likelihood that our life insurer will lend a given bond by 11
percentage points. In terms of a policy
interpretation, this is why we use that
particular metric. If you think about
applying Rule 2a-7, so Rule 2a-7 applies
to mutual funds and the extent to which they can engage in securities lending. Rule 2a-7 would exclude
life insurers from making any investment beyond one year with a residual
maturity of beyond one year. We can interpret the
coefficient that we just estimated with respect to eliminating the average fraction in the industry as a whole, eliminating all of that lending more than one year on all of the lending made by life insurers against
cash collateral. The result is a decline in lending of four
billion dollars. The scheme of things in
terms of the size of the overall lending of corporate bonds against
cash, and again, let me emphasize, sorry, life insurers whole
corporate bonds tend to lend corporate bonds. This is a small percentage. What we're saying is
that if you wanted to eliminate this part of
the maturity mismatch, the risk associated with maturity mismatch and life insurers securities
lending programs, the implication for lending into the securities market
is relatively small. Let me conclude, what
we're trying to offer in this paper is some evidence that maturity mismatch by US
life insurers is what is a driver of securities
lending programs. This is pretty important
because these are the guys who cause problems in the funding market during
the financial crisis. It's also important because
securities lending as we saw before was vital to the functioning of securities
markets as a whole. We'll also point out that these data that we're
estimating over are post-crisis
data, 2011 onwards. This maturity mismatch
is going on right now and is what is driving
securities lending right now. There's not just
a crisis results. Those low-interest rates
that we've been experiencing recently are likely to encourage securities
lending as the return on the life insurance aggregate
portfolio goes down, they have to look for
alternative sources of return. One potential source
is securities lending. Lastly, we'll just
point out that the paper suggests two new
financial stability metrics. Those are maturity mismatch on the reinvestment portfolio
of securities lenders and the cash collateral
which is reinvested in short-term markets like
that tri-party repo market. Thank you very much. 