Robin Greenwood: What's
this paper about? I'm really going to show
you three sets of facts. The first set of facts
is looking across countries and trying to understand the behavior
of very long-term yields on government bonds
and swap rates. Basically, the thing
that we're going to show you is that in countries where there are very large
private pension systems and the private pension systems typically buy very
long-dated assets, and we'll show you
some evidence of that, although our evidence there
isn't the best evidence, we will show you that
in those markets, the very long-dated
yields, meaning, for example, the 30-year yield tend to be very low relative to, for example, the 10-year rate. I'm going to show you some
suggestive scatter plots along these lines, that's going to be largely
cross-sectional evidence. The magnitudes here
are pretty meaningful. Think of this as a
somewhere between a 20 and a 40 basis point
impact on the 10 [inaudible] spread. Then I think this
raises the question of any time you see
some cross-country scatter plot along those lines, you'll ask yourself, is there
a causal mechanism here? That's where this evidence in Denmark and in other countries is going
to come into play. What I'm going to show you
is that to a large extent, this demand for very
long-dated government bonds comes from regulatory forces, which is to say that
the pension funds in many countries are regulated
on their solvency. Then how do you
measure the solvency? Well, you have to
discount the liabilities, the promised payments to
pensioners, for example, or to holders of insurance products because we'll look at insurance as well. For example, if you ask the pension fund to discount using a particular yield curve, that induces demand for
the reference rate. You can think of this as evaluating a mutual fund manager relative to, for example, the S&P 500, that induces people to hold things that look
like the S&P 500. We're going to show you
a bunch of evidence. I probably I'm not going
to have time to show you all of the
episodes in the paper, and so I'll just concentrate
on one or two of them. That when you change
that reference rate, when you change that benchmark, it has pretty dramatic
impacts on the curve. We're not going to be able to
show you the direct impact there in terms of show you
the pension funds trading, but we'll show you
the price impact which is consistent with the pension funds really
leaning to the benchmark. The third set of facts
that I'm going to allude to is when you look at all of the episodes where you have
this change in benchmark, they have a striking
commonality, which is that the episodes
themselves are not endogenous. Think about that. Why would anybody ever change
the benchmark or the way that you are
discounting the liabilities? Well, it's when the regulator, when the government is
becoming concerned about the solvency of the pensions, and they're becoming concerned about potential behavior of the pensions in order to
comply with regulation. You'll see that there's a common feature of all these episodes is
that really you'll have yields either falling in advance of the event and then quickly rebounding
during the event, or vice versa depending on the direction that
the event is going. Why do we combine this very broad cross-country
type evidence with the very narrow events
study type evidence? I think for two reasons. One, it helps clarify the
mechanism of what's going on, what exactly is driving
this pension demand. Second, it gets you a little bit more comfortable
that the stuff that I'm going to show you in
the very beginning of this talk is really causal. With all of that preamble,
let me just jump into this. Of course, we do understand. I should do this properly here. How do I show this? Of course, we understand that
interest rates have a direct impact on
the pensions, in fact, that's a most
well-understood phenomenon that when rates move, they change the net
present value of the assets versus
the liabilities. Here, we're going
to be focused on the reverse channel,
where, of course, changes in the behavior
of the pension funds are going to be driving
the underlying rates. It's interesting, I think, for these three reasons
that I've emphasized. One, it tells you
about the impact of regulation during
periods of stress. Of course, it's evidence of intermediary asset
pricing and price impact. Then third, it's adding just a bunch of
evidence that's accumulated over the past decade in studies on QE and studies on
government bonds supply, and so on that net changes
and net supply of assets, and particularly, in
fixed income assets are changing their prices. Let me start with a
cross-country evidence. This evidence largely inspired by my colleague
David Scharfstein, who in his AFA address, alerted us to all of this
data on global pensions. We're using primarily the OECD public pension
reserve funds' statistics, we're also using the
insurance statistics because in many countries, the retirement systems, they're not exclusively
drawn by pension funds. Insurance companies are also providing some of the
retirement assets. We're going to exclude
country years here where the five-year government CDS spread exceeds 200 basis points. We're not really
interested here in trying to understand
credit risk in countries, we're trying to take
that off the picture. Just think of this as
basically excluding, for example, Greece
in 2009 and 2010. That's not what we're
going to be about. First, just a little bit of
descriptive evidence here. This is just a picture of pension and insurance
assets to GDP. You can see the
remarkable range here, and you can see why Denmark
is an interesting example. I'm going to talk
about Denmark later. Denmark has this enormous
pension and insurance sector well over 200 percent of GDP. The US you can see is in
the middle of the pack. They have a pretty large
private pension system, but it's not as big as Denmark, the Netherlands, or
Sweden for that matter. Then, of course, there
are many countries' pay-as-you-go systems
like Germany, for example, which have
much smaller systems. I'm going to skip this. Now, here's another piece of evidence that I think is interesting. Frankly, this is the only thing that we could get our hands on and people are starting to come out with more
statistics on this. This is a picture from an
ECB study which is looking at the holdings of
Euro area investors, and particularly, the
maturities of those holdings. It's a little bit hard to see the picture from a
distance I think. But let me basically
tell you what it does. It is looking at, here, monetary financial institutions, that's the dark blue line, insurance companies
and pension funds, other financial institutions,
general government, and then at the very
end, households. Basically, what
you're seeing here, on the bottom axis, is the maturity of
their holdings. Again, if you look at
that red dashed line, you can see those
are the pensions. You can see that they tend
to hold relatively little in the way of short-dated assets, and a little bit more
certainly compared to other institutions in
terms of long-dated assets. Here is some similar data. This is bond holdings of Danish
investors and you can see insurance companies and
pension funds tend to be very focused on the long
end of assets. Now, it's not
exactly surprising, here are some other data. Again, it's a slightly
different source, this is from a BIS paper
looking at the durations of the liabilities of different pension funds
in different countries. You can see, for example,
in the Netherlands, most recent data, the average duration of
the liability is 21 years. You imagine hedging
that liability, you will tend to be buying
longer-term assets. You might want to do
this irrespective of regulation if you're
trying to, for example, reduce the overall funding
risk of the pension program. First set of analyses
that we're going to do is look at some
crude proxies for demand and supply and the nature of the regression
I'm going to show you is looking at the measure of demand for long-term
government bonds, and for example,
long-term swaps is going to be how large
is your pension system? You can think of this
as an instrument, I'm not going to use
the word instrument. It's an instrument in the
sense that we don't actually observe the bonds
that they hold, and so we're looking
just at the overall size of the pension system. Then in terms of supply, we're looking at how big is
the overall government debt. Now, again, when you're
thinking about supply, you can think about
it as an instrument, it's not an
instrument, but we're looking at the overall
government debt. Of course, the government has
a choice as to whether to denominate that debt
short-term or long-term. Again, the way these regressions are going to
work is we're going to be looking at the spread between a 30-year and 10-year bonds, and as a function of demand, which is pension assets
to GDP and supply, which is an offset, which is government
assets to GDP. You can also net those out. It turns out quite
conveniently that to enter these regressions with
almost exactly the same, but opposite signs are the same in magnitude,
but opposite signs. You can net those in form
of a measure of net demand. I'll show you some regressions
along those lines. Sources of the data, I've
already talked about. We also do this with a
bunch of control variables, for example, the
five-year government CDS. Then you might also control
here for the tend to spread. Now, I think it's a conceptual question as to whether you want to
do that control. Of course, we do think that
the spread on the 10/2 is probably also influenced
by these forces. But generally, we're going to be focused on the very
long end of the curve. Here's the basic fact here. We're plotting here
just as a reminder, the 30-10 spread as a function of pension
and insurance demand, net of government debt to GDP. You can see this pretty
strong correlation here. I'd like to make one extra
comment about this picture, which is that Modo Yoga gave
a discussion of this paper. I wasn't there, but my coauthor presented about a month ago. He made a really
interesting observation that we haven't really
grappled with yet, but I'll just raise
it here, which is, how do you think
about the integration of the European markets? It's interesting
because of course, Germany and the Netherlands, as just to give you an example, are very different in terms of the size of their
pension systems. You might think, if they're
thinking about it as one general European
government bond market that has one implication versus
if you think of these as very disjoint market that has a very different set
of implications. One of the things that he raised and I don't have
time to go through all of that today is that, of course, that has
changed over time. For example, our sense of how integrated the
European government bond markets are was different, as an example in 2005 versus 1995 versus for example today. He showed us some
evidence that was, I think pretty interesting
for us to pursue. Here are the corresponding
regressions. I'm going to skip the
regressions and just jump straight to what
the magnitude say. Increasing P and I
assets to GDP by about 150 percentage points reduces yield spreads by
about 36 basis points. Obviously that's a big jump. That's moving from one tail of the distribution to the other. Just to highlight
an important offset to this effect is the supply of government debt
which enters within nearly identical coefficient
of the opposite sign. It's interesting to think
about other examples here. Of course, the UK has famously shifted the maturity
structure of their debt. I have some work with Dimitri
Vayanos along these lines, shifted the maturity
structure of their debt very long
term, recognizing the long dated liabilities
of their pensions. In the UK, it's even
more interesting and subtle because the way the pensions are marked is
using real yields and that has put a ton of demand on
their real dated instruments. Think of it in their
tips market as much more distorted than their
nominal market. We did a bunch of robustness. I think the main one
I've already alluded to, which is the question
of how to think about collapsing
by currency here. Is the euro market
fully integrated? We've combined the
Euro countries into a single observation
weighted by GDP, that gives you the
same set of results, but a little bit weaker. You can also do
panel regressions using your fixed effects. Then there's some questions as to whether you want to omit the zero lower bound period
for various reasons. I'm going to skip
the robustness tests and jump to the events studies. I'm going to explain
in very broad terms what these events are about and then the details of these events are a little
bit hard to follow. I will go through
them, but I think it's easier to understand them
in very general terms. The basic way to
think about this is imagine you're a
pension fund and so you have some promised
payments that you're making to pensioners over say, the next 20 or 30 or 40 years, and you're discounting them. Imagine for a moment that
you're discounting them using the treasury curve.
What does that mean? A 30-year payment, you'd
be using the yield on a 30-year treasury
bond to discount that. Now of course, this
might induce you to hold some treasury bonds. Why? Because as the yield
on the treasuries moves, the value of those
liabilities are moving around quite a bit, and that induces some risk
in your funding position. Imagine then that you wake up and one day instead of using the treasury curve to
discount these liabilities, the regulator says, we'd like you to
use the Euro curve to discount those
30-year liabilities. Well, you said, I'm actually holding the
wrong asset now. Actually these treasuries
that I'm holding are super risky and I'm going to shift
my demand towards the euros. That's the
nature of all of these episodes that
I'm going to look at, which is to show you, that is, in fact it's the
regulatory discount curve that is particularly inducing these pensions to
buy these long dated assets. Now, you can motivate this using just the simple arithmetic of how pensions do
this discounting. Think of the funding position as just the assets minus the
discounted liabilities. Now, there are different
ways that people will essentially implement
this equation that I'm showing
you, equation three. Here's four of them,
fixed discount rates, current risk, market rates, expected return on investments, that's something
we've heard a lot about in the United States, and then this thing
called life directive. Imagine when the yield
on securities and the discount rate
moves, of course, the value of the
liability changes and the value of the assets can change in the
same direction. Actually let me
just jump to this. Think about what
happens when you move the regulatory
curve from R to R*. There's of course
a direct effect on the funding position when
I move from, for example, the treasury curve
to the Euro curve, that's going to
change my solvency by some number of
percentage points. But the key thing that we're
going to look at here is, it's going to change the future volatility of your
funding position, and that's going to induce
this hedging demand to buy the new regulatory asset. The testable prediction that
we're going to look at is when the market yield on
a particular asset is included in the
regulatory discount rate, this is going to
induce demand for the asset tied to this
new reference rate. Conversely, if it's removed, this will reduce demand
and thus reduce prices. By the way, if you look at press coverage of the events
that I'm going to look at, they're basically
consistent with this. Following a change to the regulatory discount
rate in Denmark in 2011, the Danish financial
newspaper quoted a pension company executive saying Danish government bonds are no longer linked
to the method for calculating liabilities
and therefore become risky to hold from
being gold-plated. They become risky, we've sold everything we can get rid of. These are the events that
we're going to look at. I'm going to focus
on the first one. I think given, how
much time do I have? MALE_1: A minute [inaudible] Robin Greenwood: A
minute? I'm going to take one more minute,
I'm going to take two. I'll focus on this one. Here's what happened.
The first line here shows you the
discount curve pre-event, which is a somewhat
complicated expression and gets even more
complicated post event. Again, think of this
as just moving from a treasury curve
to a Euro curve. What we're going to look at is basically we're going to say to the extent that
there's a change between these two curves, it's going to induce demand for the change
in that instrument. What do we expect? We expect
the OAS on Danish MBS, it's relative to Danish Kroner
interest rates to fall, it's because it's
inducing demand for Danish Kroner
interest rates. Here is the main
event picture. You can see here that the event
is not exactly exogenous. You can see that actually
the funding position had been moving pretty dramatically of these
pensions during that time. Then that red line is showing
that there's a huge drop on announcement of the
regulatory change. If you look at, I'm going
just fast-forward ahead. You can see many of these events have
this similar flavor, which is a change in the formula of how the
discount rate is curved. This is another example here. If you look at here is
a similar example of there's a short two
or three-week drop in yields and then a dramatic reversal upon announcement
of the new policy. I'm out of time, so
I'm going to just jump to the conclusion. All of these events
have that flavor, and so we documented the
magnitude of these effects, which it varies event by event, but changing these
discount rates impacts the curves on the order of 20 or 30 basis points for
each of these events. I might jump. You can see how many of
these events there are. Millions. Just to sum up, three pieces of evidence. If you look across in the
cross-country evidence, yield spread between 30 and
10-year bonds negatively related to the size of the
pension and insurance sector. Then six events studies, I've only shown you one of them, but the rest of them have
a very similar flavor to look at unexpected
changes in pension demand. I think what the events studies
show you is two things. One, that much of
this demand for long dated bonds does come from regulation ultimately, and two, that the regulator is put in rather a tough
position in that sense that, they can choose what
that discount rate is. You can see in these examples that when these pensions
are under stress, there's pressure for them to change
those discount rates. 