Jonathan Schwabish: I am
a strong believer that as researchers, as analysts, as professors, we can do a much better job
communicating our work, communicating our
analysis, communicating our data both to each other
and to a wider audience. Too often what we do
as researchers is we forget that who we're
communicating with, our readers, our users, our audience may not be the experts that we
may be in that topic. What I'm going to talk
about today is how to do a better job visualizing
your data with the goal being to improve the way you communicate
your work so that more people can use it
and more people can act upon it so that your work
can have a greater impact. This came to my attention really when I was working at the Congressional Budget Office, I worked at CBO for
about nine years. I spent most of my
time working on social security issues at CBO. As an analyst at CBO, I would write a lot of
reports like many of you do. We'd get some data,
we'd analyze it, run some regressions, make
a graph, make a table, drop it into a report surrounded by a bunch of text, edit it, revise it, edit it, revise it and it'd go out to the world and there
would be silence. I wouldn't get any calls with questions, calls
with clarifications. I wasn't invited to fancy
DC congressional hearings. There weren't any fancy DC
parties I was invited to. We were creating
things like this. This is the first draft of a main figure from a report
on social security reform. We were looking at 30
different reforms using CBO's long-term social security
microsimulation model. Thirty different reforms
and for each reform, we're going to show changes in benefits paid out
from the system, taxes received to the system, the balance between the two, different trust
fund measures for different years, for
different metrics. We're planning to show to members of Congress
a spreadsheet but that's what we were
going to give them. A spreadsheet that
they would have little time or inclination
to wade through. Now, at the time I was
working on this report, I attended Edward Tufte's
one-day workshop. Now, I see some heads nodding. Many of you may have
heard of Edward Tufte. In the larger world, Edward Tufte is known as a modern data visualization
expert or guru or godfather. Within the data
visualization field, he is known as a cranky old guy. He doesn't like lots of things. He hates PowerPoint. I had to get through
all of that and I learned two things at
Ed Tufte's workshops. The first thing I learned is that people are going
to read your graphs. They're going to look
at your visualizations. In many years of
graduate school and many years of
professional service, no one ever asked me to
think about my reader, think about my audience. I wasn't taught
how to write well, I wasn't taught how
to make good graphs. I wasn't taught how to
give better presentations. That communications part was
not part of the education. The second thing I learned at Tufte's workshop
were sparklines. This is an example
of sparklines. They're essentially
just small line charts so that you can take
a complex chart or a dense data table and
add some small charts at the end to break it up to make it easier to
see the patterns. Now sparklines were
important to me at the time because I was
working on this report. I came back to the
office and I tried to change what we're doing here. All I did was take a lot of those numbers out and
replace them with small, we can call them
spark area charts. So that for the first option, you can see that the
trust fund balance doesn't change over time, and the second one it
increases and it flattens off, and then the third
one continuously increases over the period. At a moment's glance through this long figure of 30 options, you get the core of the idea of looking
through this table. Now from that moment on, we
had great success with that. I found a window in which we can improve the way I as
an individual researcher, as an individual
analyst and we as an agency can improve the way
we communicated our work. We started improving
the graphics in our regular reports. We started creating
new report types, we started making infographics. This is infographic on the long-term budget
outlook from 2012. This accompanies 110-page report on the long-term budget outlook. Here, what we're trying
to do is highlight, bubble up the most important
pieces of information for members of Congress who
need those headlines, those statistics,
those single facts so that they can communicate
to their constituents, to their colleagues,
to their staffs. One day in the summer of 2012, I'm in my office probably critiquing one of Jim's graphs. Out in the hallway is a large television showing a house budget
committee hearing. I'm in my office and suddenly I hear screens of John come outside your infographic
is on TV and I go out. Sure enough, Congressman Chris
Van Hollen from Maryland, is now the senator holding
up that infographic. If you look really carefully, you can see he's scribbled
all over the page. Now that's a win. That's a policymaker holding up an infographic in the
congressional hearing. It is clearly not the only time CBO
numbers have been used, as we can see just today. These numbers are
used all the time, but it was the first time I
think that I know of that a CBO infographic was used
in a congressional hearing. From that time forward, I tried to figure out
ways in which we can improve the way we
as researchers, as analysts, as
people working with data-rich content can improve the way we communicate our work. I'm going to touch on three things today that I think can help you on your way to creating more effective
visualizations but before I do, I want
to take a quick pause. Because what I'm not going
to talk about today is presentations and how
to give presentations but I do want to make quick
pause. Here's from Twitter. We should have gun control rules at all economics conferences, there's just too
many bullets flying around at economic conferences, in 3D column charts too. I just want to point out the
three core principles that I have when it comes to
presentations and I'll move on to data visualization. The three principles that
I have that I think can help everybody in
this audience at this conference and in the
next conference that you attend is to visualize as
much content as you can. Take things out of
those bullet points, make them graphs, use
icons, use images, use things that are more
likely for your audience to recognize and recall and hold onto when they leave
the seminar room. Unify your content both
what you say and what you show and how your slides look over the course
of your presentation. As you unify your slides, it's easier for your audience to maintain their attention and to not be surprised
every time you show them a different thing
with a different color and a different layout. Then finally, focus your audience's attention
where you want it. When you copy and paste appendix table 1
into your slides, no one can see that. Focus your audience's attention where you want it at all times. That's just a side note,
just the pause button. Now I want to talk about three things about
data visualization. I'm going to first
talk about the purpose of data visualization. When I talk about the purpose
of data visualization, I'm going to think in
spectrums or in axes. The first spectrum is one that runs from analytics
to presentation. Because you may make a
visualization on your desk, at Stata, in Excel, in SPSS, in SAS, whatever tool you're using and that visualization
is there for you, for you to better
understand your model, for you to better
understand your data. But when you take
that scatter plot and you put it on your website, you put it in a journal article, you put it in a working paper, that scatter plot this
now for your audience. You need to keep in
mind who your audience is and how they're going
to use that visualization. Things like annotation,
color, font, layout, these are all elements and attributes that we need
to be thinking about carefully so that
our audience can get the information that
we want them to have out of the visualization. Now when I think of
spectrums or thinking about the purpose
of visualization, I'm going to think in
two perpendicular axes. The first axis is the form axis. Here, visualizations run
from static to interactive. Static visualizations
are not active, they're not moving. Interactive visualizations
are ones in which there's a two-way exchange
of information between the user
and the interface. Then somewhere in the middle are animated visualizations. These might be films or
videos where you can click. You might be able to
interact and may be combinations of static
visualizations. The perpendicular axis
is the function axis. Here, visualizations run from explanatory to exploratory. Explanatory visualizations
are ones in which I is the creator and
telling you a story. I'm trying to get you
to buy into my ideas, my hypothesis, my conclusions. Exploratory
visualizations are ones in which I am asking you as the reader or the user to go in and come away
with your own ideas, own hypothesis, own conclusions, maybe take the data and do something with it on your own. If we put these two together, we end up with this schematic of the space of data visualization. What I'd like to do is walk through examples
of each quadrant. We start in the
top left quadrant. These are static
explanatory graphs. This is what we're used to making and seeing all the time. These are the line charts and the bar charts and
the area charts. We've also seen lately the
explosion of infographics. This is an infographic I
made when I was at CBO. This infographic went along with a 90-page paper on federal means-tested
programs and tax credits, EITC, Medicaid, Snap, Child Nutrition Programs. You can see what we have here is a very short
definition at the top. Two sentences that
describe what's going on in these
programs over the period, a column chart that shows
changes in spending over time, and on the right
is a breakdown of 10 different programs
into healthcare, cash assistance in
nutrition and education. Now when I was asked to make
this infographic for CBO, I call the authors and I said, I've been asked to make an
infographic for your paper, what's the headline,
what's the summary? It's three good
economists or one to do, they sent me a two-page summary. I said no, you don't understand, I'm asked to make
an infographic, what's the headline
of your report? It's three good
economists or one to do, they sent me a page
and a half summary. We iterated like
that for a while. Finally, one of the authors
called me up and she said the headline is, it's
Medicaid stupid. That's a great headline. We can't send that to Congress, but that's a great headline. What you can see here
with that big blue bar at the top, it's
Medicaid stupid. That's where this
infographic starts and it's modular in a sense. We have a second panel here that talks about what's
driving these changes. Is it participation? Is it spending per participant? This is taking about
seven pages of text and boiling it down. You can think about it as just taking those topic sentences, because I'm trying to
target a different user, a different type of reader. In the third section,
we have changes in spending, participation, and average spending
per participant for each of those programs. I'm using here what's
called the dot plot, so I'm not showing all the data. Too often we just show
everybody all the data and we say good luck try
to figure it out. Here I'm just showing two
data values, 1991 and 2011. Then the left panel,
you can see very clearly that it's
Medicaid stupid. Then in the final panel, we have what's CBOs value-added which are projected changes in 2012 and 2023, those 10 programs plus
the exchange subsidies. You can see on the far left side, well,
maybe not after today, but in the far left side, we have the change in Medicaid, so it's changes in
Medicaid stupid. Those are static
explanatory grasp. What about static
exploratory graphs? Again, here we're asking our
user or reader to dive into the visualization
and come away with their own ideas, their
own conclusions. This is an infographic from designer Kristin
Szucs that looks at the relationship between
a movie's profitability and it's critical reviews. For each one of
these little glyphs, each of these little icons, we have two vertical lines. The left vertical
line shows the movies Rotten Tomatoes
score and the right vertical line shows
the gap between the movies Worldwide gross
revenues and its budget. The height there is
showing the profitability. If you go through
this visualization, what you notice is she's not
telling you a single story. She's not telling you
a single conclusion, she's not telling
you that dramas have become more highly
rated over time, or that comedies are more
profitable than thrillers. You as the reader have to go
into this visualization and explore the data on
your own and come away with your own ideas
and conclusions. Now we go into the
bottom half of this schematic, the
interactive side. Now, lot of people
get excited about the bottom half
of this schematic because that's where
the clicking happens. When I was at CBO, we didn't live in
the bottom half because we didn't believe Nancy Pelosi and John
painter were going to sit down and click
around with the thing. It just wasn't going to happen but if those of you
who are interested in creating these
interactive visualizations, there has traditionally
been a three-step mantra. The three-step mantra
has been overview first, zoom and filter, and details on demand. You give the user the overview, you let them filter in, and you give them the
details on demand. That has changed
slightly because of mobile technology where really no one wants to
click on anything but I'm going to show
you some examples from this overview, zoom and filter, and details on demand. The first example is
from the New York Times. This is from their
visualization of President Obama's
2013 budget proposal. What you have here
is what's called the circle packing diagram. Each circle represents a part of the President's budget packed
within a larger circle, and so you get that overview of the budget by the
circles and the colors. You can then zoom in and filter
by selecting these tabs. Do you want to see it
by type of spending? Do you want to see it by change? Do you want to see it
by department total? Then you can zoom in and
filter by selecting each of those circles so you can get more information in
the tool tip above. This is another
example from the OECD, their better life index. OECD has lots of data. They've collected that data, create what they call
a better life index. Things like education,
jobs, housing, incomes. Each one of those
elements in the index becomes a pedal on each
of these flower glyphs. You can go and you
get the overview of the entire space because
of those flowers, you can zoom in and
filter both by changing the relative weights of each of the inputs into the filter, or you can go in and
select the countries, select the indexes to get more and more information so
that you get the overview, you get to then go
and zoom and filter. Then once you're in each of the countries are in
each of the metrics, you can get more details on demand by playing with
these little bar charts, by downloading the PDF reports, or even going into
their data tool. The final quadrant are
explanatory interactive graphics. The simplest way to think
about this are just take your standard charts and add
interactivity on top of it. These are simple line
charts from the World Bank. You can click, you
can highlight, but these lines are
still going down and these lines are
still going up. We can still tell stories or give explanations
through interactivity. This is a New York
Times project, the Path to the White House. This shows all paths by
which Donald Trump or Hillary Clinton could have won the presidential election. You get to go in
and select which states you think each
candidate is going to win. You can easily imagine
this written out in texts. By interacting with it, you get to see the
relative paths and the relative combinations.
That's this space. Now, as I mentioned,
somewhere in the middle are animated
visualizations. It doesn't mean that
they're the best. It just means that
they have combinations of these four quadrants. This is Aaron Koblin's
flight paths project. It shows all flight paths in US airspace over
a 24-hour period. You can see as we go from
daytime to nighttime, the country largely goes dark. You see people take their red eye flights on the West Coast, cross the country
to the East Coast. As we near daybreak, you see flights come over the
Atlantic from Europe, and then the East
Coast wakes up. As we go across the country
over the course of the day, the airs wake up and more and more flights
go across the country. As we near the end of the day, you see folks on the West
Coast in San Francisco and Los Angeles make their
journey Southwest to Hawaii. This visualization has aspects
of these four quadrants. It allows you to explore data about US airspace by zooming in, by zooming out, by rewinding and
fast-forwarding the video. It works as a static
visualization, it works in an
explanatory visualization where you get
different feelings, different stories out of this visualization
that you might get from a table or a bar
chart or a pie chart. That's the first thing I
want to talk about was the purpose of data
visualization. The second theme I want
to talk about where strategies to create
better visualizations. Here's where I'm going
to try to get as practical as I can. It's important to be visual, as I mentioned at the
front, because as John Medina writes in his book, Brain Rules, the more
visual and input becomes, the more likely it is to be
recognized and recalled. As you're making
your slides tonight for tomorrow's lecture, which I know people are doing, try to get the numbers
out of the tables, make visualizations,
make graphs. A simple bar chart is
much more likely to be recognized and recalled
than that regression table. Now, how do we perceive? How do we process
visual information? We use a process called
preattentive processing. The formal definition for preattentive processing is
cognitive operations that can be performed prior to focusing attention on any
particular region of an image. In other words, it's the
stuff you notice right away. When I show you this image, now the guy in the yellow and the black for those
who don't know, his name is Odlaw. He's the bad guy in
the Waldo books. It's Waldo spelled backwards. I recently found out that most people don't
know who Odlaw is. The guy in the yellow and black, his name is Odlaw. Now, when you look
at this image, you can very quickly find Waldo in this
picture. Why is that? Well, Waldo is wearing
different colored clothes, he's got a red and white shirt, he's got blue pants. He's holding a cane. His head is held at a
slightly different angle. Those attributes
are things that we use to pay attention to
parts of this image. We can take these
preattentive attributes and apply them to
our visualizations. Things like shape, enclosure, the width of the line, color, the saturation
of the line. These are all things that
we can add or include in our visualizations to draw
attention where we want it. We focus our reader or audience's attention
where we wanted all time. Let's test this
just very quickly. Here's basically what we do
to each other every day. Here's the spreadsheet,
telling me the story. Count for me the
number of threes. Now, don't really do it. I mean, what you're all doing right
now is going number by number to find the three's. Then your hand that
stands below your chair, you're counting them
on your fingers but what if I use some of those pre-attentive attributes? What have I colored
those threes red? What if I highlighted
them to using closure? These are all
pre-attentive attributes that make it easier
for your reader, for the audience
to see the story, to see the explanation, to see the conclusion
you want them to find. What about a line chart, the pre-attentive attribute
or the points of that line, and the angle of the
line that connects them? If I added a box around
the forecast area, it draws your attention to
the right side of the image. That's a pre-attentive
attribute. What about a scatter plot? The pre-attentive attribute
of a scatter plot, or just the points on
the page or the screen. Your attention may be drawn a little bit to that
point out to the right, which might be an
outlier, but we can highlight that even
more by adding color. I could add color to the
rest of the points to draw your attention around
the graph where I want it. Finally, we could test
with a bar chart. The pre-attentive attribute of a bar chart is the
length of the bars but instead of just saying, "Here's a bar chart, good luck," we can add
pre-attentive attributes. I could highlight
the first two bars, draw your attention there. I might even add color and de-saturate the
next two bars and de-emphasize those
and add some texts of this graph to help
tell that story. The first practical
thing I want to leave you with is to start with gray. When you make your
visualizations start with gray. Here's your standard
Excel chart. I can insert and publish
to wherever I want. It looks like it
was made in Excel. No problem, you could read this, you don't get anything
really out of it but if I made all
those lines gray, I can't give this to you because you won't be able to
figure anything out. Now as I start with gray, I as a creator, have to be strategic and purposeful with what
I do with this graph, so now I can add
red to this line to draw your attention
to that line. Maybe I'll color in the
other lines and I'll clean this graph up and
we see this all the time in practice
from some of the top places that do
data visualization. This is from NPR, this is graduation
rates for all states in the US plus the nation
and you can see how the graduation rate
for Alabama is thicker and colored red and for the nation it's thicker
and colored orange. Those two pre-attentive
attributes draw your attention to those lines on the
graph while still giving you the relative picture of the rest of the country. Back in the nomination
process last summer, the New York Times
did this story on the nomination process they started with this big gray box. The US is home to
324 million people. Each box is a million
people and then they walk through this
visualization step-by-step, highlighting each part
of this gray box, purposely adding
color, purposely adding annotation so that
they walk you through. I'm going to talk
about strategies, are going to talk about five different things
and each one I'm going to try to move from
ineffective visualizations to effective visualizations. The first strategy I
want to talk about is moving from cluttered
to uncluttered. This is a graph from Jay Pam. Now, when you look
at this graph, well, first off, this is a graph that's plotting the coefficient results from four models that are
looking at the relationship between the unemployment rate and food stamp participation. Now when you look at this graph, where does your eye go first? The zero line, I heard
someone say the zero line. The zero line, why
the zero line? MALE_1: It's dark. Jonathan Schwabish: Because
it's dark and it's thick. Because that's a
pre-attentive attribute and the zero line is not the most important line
on this graph, right? The coefficient line is the most important line in this graph. We're not emphasizing the data. We have lots of tick marks that are probably unnecessary, there's 28 different
percentage signs. There's four y-axis labels. I have no idea what WE stands for and for
the love of God, Jay Pam, at least spelling
out below the graph. No, you have to go 15 pages
earlier in the article. If you're anything like
me, you read the abstract, you flipped through the
tables in the graphs. You've come to this
graph and you have no idea what you're
talking about and then there are two
data points that are just not on the graph because it's inconvenient to go to
plus or minus 20 percent. Here's one way that I
might remake this graph. I've lightened all
the grid lines. I've made that zero
axis grid lines slightly darker than the rest because it acts as a base for the series that
dropped below zero. I've eliminated two sets of y-axis labels with two sets of x-axis labels
because their charts are aligned horizontally
and vertically. I've spelled out each
of those abbreviations, so now you know that WE stands for welfare
cash assistance. I've moved the word caseloads, which appeared four
times the original, I move that into the title. The most important change I made was that I
made the darkest, thickest line, the
coefficient line. Now, we could
quibble about this, you might want to have
the labels back on. You might want to have dashed lines instead of solid lines. You might want to add color and might want to fill it in. Those are all things
that we could do but this version, I think, does a better job of showing
the data and reducing all that clutter
and all that stuff around it. So it's
easier to see the data. I call this one a clutter plot. This is from Journal of
Economic Perspectives. Now, a couple of things I think we can all
appreciate in this room. First off, it's very clear
that this was made in Stata. It's got that blue Arial font, everyone's capitalized
so it yells at you. Secondly, we can all appreciate that the
journal thought that this graph could use some improvement and so they added the word
China up in the top-left with an arrow
that points to the point, also labeled China with CHN. Now, in the article, the author talks about China relative to four
other countries: Thailand, Malaysia, Costa Rica, and the Philippines. Now if you know those
three-letter codes for those four countries,
some of you do, I'm sure. You can go
try to find them here. Hard to do, but what if we think about the audience and think
about our reader? All I've done here has
gotten rid of the labels. I've lightened a lot
of those points. I've de-cluttered this graph. I've highlighted those
four points in green, I've added the labels
directly and I made the China point a little
darker with the label. Now, someone might
say, well, yeah, but someone wants to know where Denmark is in this space. Okay, first off, no one really wants to
know or Denmark is. Secondly, even if they do, we are far beyond the time
and place where there's only one way to get
information to our readers. The author here has
his own website. He has a department website. This was an NBER working paper, and the journal has
a website. That's at least four places, or an Excel file or a CSV
file, or a CSV file or Stata code could
live with a person who wants to know where Denmark sits can go look at it, but the author is telling the story about these
five countries. So I've gone from
clutter to uncluttered. Let's go from separated
to integrated. The simplest when I'm
talking about here, I'm thinking about here
is integrating the texts and the graphs together
and so the simplest way to think about that is getting the legends that sit
off disconnected from your content and
moving them onto your graph itself directly
leaving the graph. That in this graph from Social
Security Advisory Board, we have a legend that takes up a lot of space on
the right side, and if you look carefully, the order of the legend doesn't match the
order of the lines. So you have to go
back and forth twice. Here's one potential
very simple remake. I got rid of one of
those data markers. I got rid of a bunch of
the grid lines I lighten them up and I added
the tax rate onto the graph and I had the color of the text match the
color of the line. Very simple to do, this is not magic. One more from SSA. SSA in USA tend to show
up in my slides a lot. USA, we have a simple
column chart here. Now, each column has five things that are telling you the same piece
of information. There's a left outline,
a right outline, a top outline, a
fill, and a number. We have these weird spaces
between the columns, should be pushed together
and a legend that sits up there disconnected
from the graph itself. Here's one potential
simple remake. I've lightened the grid lines. I got rid of the outlines
around the bars. I pushed those bars together and I added that legend
right onto the graph, directly labeling the graph. Now a lot of people
ask me about tools. What tools do I use? What
coding languages am I using? This was all done in Excel, and this was not done with any text boxes or drawing lines. Everything here is done
with using data and so for those of you who are
making your graphs in Excel, this is how it's done. It's a column chart with six
scatter plots put on top of it and each scatter
plot has error bars wrapped around them and each of those points are
linked to the data. So that when I update
this graph and all the columns go up by $5,000, all the lines and all the labels move along simultaneously. That way, I can update
this graph more easily and I can move
it from Excel to PowerPoint with one copy and paste instead of having
several different objects. That's the first integrating
text and graphics. Get those legends, get
rid of the legend, and integrate the text
onto the graph itself. The second thing, the
more complicated thing, the thing that we
as researchers, as people creating data-rich
content don't do enough, is annotate our graphs where
we annotate the graphs to tell our user what they're supposed to get
out of the graph. Here's a very simple
line chart of the rise and fall
and Blackberry. By the way, just so you know, don't make fun of
Blackberry when you talk to the Department
of Justice. They don't take it very kindly because lawyers still
use blackberries, but if you look at this graph, it's just a line chart.
The author has added five different little
sentences to guide you along the graph so
that you're not guessing what's going on. Here's a simple graph from
an NBER working paper. We can all read this graph. We all look at this graph. We know immediately
what's going on because the working paper is
written and designed for us but what the NBER also does,
which I think is greatest, has a digest. The digest
is blasted out to a wider audience. So
notice what they did with this version of the graph. They got rid of the
confidence interval bands. They've shaded in
the right side of this graph, a pre-attentive
attribute, and the attitude very simple
pieces of annotation less likely to be below 200
percent of the poverty line, more likely to be below 200
percent of the poverty line. Very simple annotations that everyone in this room can do. This is a scatter plot
from the New York Times. We have men's weekly
earnings on the x-axis, women's weekly earnings
on the y-axis. Everyone in this room
can read a scatter plot, but not so unnecessarily for the average New
York Times reader. So notice what the
Times has done. They've added four
diagonal lines. The 45-degree line,
thick and bold, and black is labeled
equal wages. When I come to this
graph, I know, this industry lies
along this line, men and women are in the
same in that industry but what happens when
I get off the line? Well, if I end up in this spot, notice that we have three
other diagonal lines. Women earn 10 percent
less than men, 20 percent less than men, 30 percent less than men. That the average
neurotransmitter, or any reader for that matter can go in and get a sense of the magnitude
of each of those points. Final example, this is probably my favorite of an extraordinary use of
very simple annotation. This is from the LA
Times is a bubble chart, which shows the
relationship between the change in
violent crime rates shown on the x-axis
and the change in property crime rates
along the y-axis. Everyone in this
room is best-fitting the line right now. I can hear the mental
wheels turning but the average LA
Times Theater is not best-fitting a
line to this space. They may not have even seen
a bubble chart before, and so notice what
the LA Times did. In the top right quadrant is a big red box with a big
red word that says worse. In the bottom left box is a big blue box with a big
blue word that says better. Even if I don't know
how to read this chart, I know that that
stuff up there is bad and that stuff
down here is good, and then I have a small
boldface headline and a sentence below each. If the annotation on this graph delivers to me both how to read the graph and also the content that I should
walk away with. Now I've gone from separated to integrated, let me
go the other way. Integrated to separated, and what I'm thinking about
here is spaghetti graphs. Spaghetti graphs where we put too much stuff on the chart. We just put it all on there and we say, "Hey,
good luck to you." One way to remedy that is something
called small multiples, or instead of putting
everything on the chart, you break it up and
make smaller version. You can see we have some sparklines there
on the top-left, but also this can be
applied to any graph type, maps, line, scatter
plots, bar charts. Here's another example
from Social Security. Now, any guesses as to what tool was used to make this graph? First off, I'll
talk a little bit more about this in a
moment. Don't do this. Don't use Excel's defaults, or status defaults, or SAS's defaults because it looks like you just did
what this person did, which was insert line chart
and publish. That's it. Now with four lines, I find this chart hard to read. It's just there's something about the pattern that
makes it hard to read. Well, I can break up this
very simple line chart into small multiples. Here I've created four
versions of the same chart, and I've just highlighted a different line in each
of the four versions that you can more clearly see the patterns in
each of the charts. I've talked about cluttered, and uncluttered,
separated, integrated. Let me talk about
circles and bar, because one of the
big debates in the data visualization field is whether we should use
pie charts or not. You have two sides
of the argument. You have one side that said pie charts are great because I know sum of the slices
sums to 100 percent. It also reminds me
of pie and pizza, and round foods, and
that's delicious. The other side of
the argument says, we're not very good at
discerning the quantities formed by the angles of the
slices in the pie chart. Let's do a couple of
quick experiments. Here's a pie chart
built-in Excel. What are your guesses
as to the share of the total represented
by company C, the red slice at the bottom? Just yell it out.
We're all friends. Maybe one at a time, 30, 25, 20, 20, and some others. Somewhere between 20
and 30, that'd be fair. What if I rotate the
graph very slightly? Very clearly 25 percent,
and why is that? Well, it's because we
now see the right angle. Which is for me, those 90
degree increments are very familiar to our
eyes and our brains, and just reorienting
the data change how we discern those quantities. Now the first camp
in this argument, this is the graph
that they like. They like the part to
whole relationships. They like being able to see the relationship between
one slice and the whole but when we put them
together, it gets harder and harder to make
these estimations. Let's do another experiment. Shares of the total
represented by the purple slice company in the top-left. We'll
do it this way. I'm going to count up from the range that I've
heard and just raise your hand when
you hear the number that corresponds to your
belief of that purple slice. We'll start at five percent, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 35. One person guessed 35
once, I don't know why. I really should do
a study on this because it is the
exact same pattern every time there's
a spike at eight, a spike around 10,
a smaller spike at 11, another spike at 13. Let me show you what
happens when I take these data and plot
it in a column chart. Now, two things
have just happened. The first thing that happened
is all the people that guessed 10 percent
are going like this. They're tearing
themselves on right now. You don't get a prize
for guessing 10 percent. The second thing
that's happening is the pie chart defenders are all up in arms because I've added grid lines and tick marks, and I do that because that's how we see these
charts in the wild. We don't add tick marks
to our pie charts. This is how we see column
charts and bar charts, and we're just better able to discern quantities
from the lengths of the bars or heights
of the columns than we are the slices
of the pie chart. Here's where the pie chart
defenders come back and say, yes, but I don't know
this is part to whole. That's a legitimate concern, and there's not a lot
of solutions to that, except to maybe integrate
that into the title. Say it's percent of the total
or share of the aggregate. Now, I am not a pie chart
hider fundamentalist. I don't make pie
charts, but I'm not a fundamentalist about
it. I'll say this. If I were to make pie charts, I would restrict myself
to three or four slices. Why? Because five or more, it's just hard to figure
out the quantities. Two slices, I'm really just
showing you one number. I'm not sure I need a graph
for that, so three or four, but if I still haven't
convinced you, there are really only two
rules for pie charts. There's a hard rule
and a soft rule. The hard rule is the pie charts have to sum to 100 percent. You think we would
all know that, but when SSA leaves out that
little bitty slice there, it's not rounding.
That's the hard rule. The soft rule is you
can't write this, you can't make this sum up. The soft rule is you try
to orient your data so that you go clockwise,
largest to smallest. I say it's a soft rule because you notice here in this example, in the pie chart on the right, the other categories
four percent ends up in the last position. Not so in the 1962,
pie chart on the left. I would say that that's
okay for two reasons. One, you want this slices
to be in the same position, and two the other ends
up in the last category. That makes sense. What are
the alternatives to this? Here's a stacked bar chart. You still get that part
to whole relationship. I've added lines here to draw your attention to
the series that change, or I could use what's
called the slope chart. Here I have 1962 on a left vertical axis in 2009
and a right vertical axis. I've colored the two
series that are declining, I've colored them in red, the four categories that
are increasing in blue but here, I don't get that
part to whole relationship. This is more about
the change over time. Some debate about pie
charts and circles. Less debate about using 3D, and I'm going to talk
about not this case. This is a fascinating piece from the New York Times
about the yield curve. They actually had
three variables, three-dimensions
were appropriate. This is very rarely done well. I'm talking about 3D when
we do stuff like this. Don't need to do this. Why? Well, let me
try to explain. If I have a pie chart
with three slices, each slice of the pie takes up 1/3 of the
page or the screen. If I rotate that
pie, make it 3D, that front slice now takes up much higher proportion
of the page or the screen. It's not a knock on pie charts. It's a knock on actually
distorting the data. I can do the same thing
in a column chart. The 2D representation
of the top-left, that first column is
very clearly 40 percent. When I rotate the chart, that first column no longer
looks like it's 40 percent. Now why is that? Because what the software tool does is try to give you
a perspective rendering. If you were to bend
all the way down, and imagine a plane
running along the top of that column it intersects
at 40 percent grid line, but that's not what it looks
like when we look at it. Same thing for this. This is from the USDA. First thing you have
to do with this chart is you have to
ignore the y-axis. The y-axis label is
millions/billions. Say, choose your own adventure,
type situation. If you notice the
certification bar on the left, the certification bar
is labeled 1,833. I don't know if that's
millions or trillions or what, but no part of that column actually
touches the 1,800 mid-line. That's because a plane runs along the top of that column. It intersects that
background at 1,833, but that's not
what it looks like when we view the graph. Finally, we've seen these a lot. This is from a journal of
women in politics and policy. I call these cityscape diagrams. Any guesses as to the sheriff never married white
non-Hispanics? It's back there somewhere. For good luck. Last strategy, going from default to new. Any guesses as to what tool
uses this color palette? Excel. I have nothing against these particular shades
of red, green, and blue. You might love the shades
of red, green, and blue. Your entire house may be decorated in these shades
of red, green, and blue. The problem is that everybody
uses these shades of red, green, and blue and so that your graph looks like
everybody else's graph. Avoid the default colors. It's very simple to input
a new color palette. Excel has in its page layout tab 50 other color palettes. Many of them are just
as bad or worse than the default palette but at
least they look different. You can load up a
different scheme in stata and do something different than using the defaults. This graph says to
me as a reader that all the content producer did was hit insert
stacked column chart, publish to the web, and
they went to lunch. The other thing
about color is to avoid the rainbow color palette. There's really a
couple of reasons for the rainbow color palette. The first I want to demonstrate
by showing you this map. This is a map of the
evapotranspirations, amount of water going
back into the atmosphere. When you look at this map, there's that really stark line right down the middle
of the country. When I saw this map
I thought, well, they ticked up for a little bit and then
they just said all else. So you get
this weird artifact but it's actually not
the case. The legend all takes up by 0.09. It's not a problem
with the legend, it's a problem with the
rainbow color palette. If you look at that
rainbow color palette, the green spectrum is much wider than the yellow spectrum or the light blue spectrum. If I go from a unit
change from say 2-3 and I'm in the greens, you might not see a perceptual
change in the greens. If I did a similar
unit change from 9-10 but was in the blue
part of the color palette, you would see a change from
a light blue to a dark blue. We don't want to use the
rainbow color palette. Secondly, when I make a map of say poverty rates and I say that the high poverty rate
states are in dark blue or in dark gray and the
low poverty rate states are in light blue or in light
gray, that makes sense. That single color
ramp makes sense. It's hard for me to say that purple means more than orange. That's not really a
logical statement. A similar thing with fonts. To avoid the default fonts, I could spot from my hotel room who's using the Calibri font
in their slides. Well, maybe not Comic Sans, but the rest of these fonts
may be perfectly fine, it's just that
everybody uses them. There are lots of
other great fonts default on everyone's machine, Century Gothic, Lucida
Grande, Verdana. These fonts are standard. You can share them
with one another. It's just that nobody uses them but they're all
sitting right there. If you want to take it
a step further you can go out and get lots of
great fonts for free. At the Urban Institute, we use the Ladle
font but you can see some of these
other fonts as well. These are all free that
you can download and use. I've talked about the purpose
of data visualization, I've talked about strategies to create more effective
visualizations. The last thing I
want to talk about with you today is how to pick a graph for your
data because this is one of the primary questions. There's no one-to-one
correspondence between data type
and graph type. If there were, this
would be easy. I have time series data
and I plug something in. To try to help people
make this decision, I teamed up with a
designer friend of mine to create a project that we
call the Graphic Continuum. This is the current version
of the Graphic Continuum. This is the picture
of the poster. It has over 90
different graph types split into six
different categories, distribution, time,
comparing categories, geo-spatial, part-to-whole,
and relationships. You can see some of these
linking lines and little boxes that sit on a poster
and what those lines do are show some of the
overlaps. So that I can use a column chart for example to show
changes over time, I can also use a column
chart to compare categories. Again, there is no
one-to-one correspondence between data type
and graph type. We made this poster,
people were very excited. Then I started getting
emails from people who said, I work in a cubicle, I don't have room for a poster, can you make me something else? We made this little sheet. Again, over 90
different graph types then we made flashcards because I'm basically a glutton
for punishment. The idea here is
there is no answer but what we're trying to do is create a library for people. Then instead of
saying whatever's in my Excel drop-down menu, that's all I can create, so you should never
create the 3D cones. There's lots of other options out there that you can
use to create data. Not because they're
inherently better but because sometimes when we
see data in different ways, when we present data
in different ways, it allows us to see insights, make discoveries and make
conclusions in different ways. What I want to do
to close up today is to tell you about this
Graphic Continuum project. Now, the Graphic
Continuum project itself is inherently non-linear. It's inherently complex because you can use different
graph types for different data types. What I'm going to do
to tell you about this Graphic Continuum project is I'm going to borrow
one of my kids' books. Now, if you have kids, you may be familiar
with these books, If You Give a Moose a Muffin, If You Give a Pig a Party, If You Give a Mouse a Cookie. There's a whole bunch of them. If you don't have
kids, you should become familiar with these books because they're all fantastic. They all use what's known as a circular story-telling device. So that in the
case of this book, the kid gives a moose a muffin, who eats another
muffin, another muffin, and another muffin until
there are no more muffins. They're going to go
to the store to get more muffin, mix to
make more muffins. First, they have to
get their jackets on. There's a hole in
the jacket, then they have to get a needle
and thread to fix it. They get the needle and
thread and then they start making sock puppets. It just circles all the
way back until the moose remembers that he wants
to get more muffins. I'm going to tell
you the story of this Graphic
Continuum but I'm not going to use my kid's
book. I'm going to use my own version of this book. Let's begin. If you
give a nerd a number, he might want a
table to go with it. You could add another number
and another number but let's first focus on
that first number. He could take that
number and he can plot it in an XY space. He can add another number and another number and
even more numbers. This might remind
him of other shapes he could use to plot these data. It might remind him of
a stacked area chart or a normalized area chart or
even other graph types. It might remind him of
a paired column chart or a stacked column chart. This might remind him that
he could rotate the space 90 degrees to create a paired bar chart or
a stacked bar chart. If you go back to those lines he can add more and more data. This might remind him that
he could break this chart up to create sparklines
or small multiples. With the sparklines, it might remind him that
he can focus just on the endpoints of this
graph and that may lead him to think
about a slope chart. Or he could rotate it 90
degrees to create a dot plot. All this uncertainty
about what graphs we use for what data we have may lead him to think
about uncertainty, may lead him to think
about a fan chart or a box and whisker plot, or a violin chart. If you add a secondary
vertical axis to that line chart it may
lead him to think about correlations which
may lead him to think about a scatter plot
to which he could add a third variable to create a bubble chart or the
unfortunate 3D bubble chart. He could combine the lines with the correlations to create a parallel coordinates
plot or a radar chart or he can combine the correlations with
the time to create a connected scatter
plot in which correlations are
plotted over time. Then this may lead him to
think about connections, may lead him to think
about a network diagram or force-directed
layout, or a hive chart. The curves in the hive chart may lead him to think
about a chord diagram. The arcs and the
chord diagram may lead him to think
about an arc chart. He could combine the
time from earlier and the line chart with the
art chart to create a sequential art
chart which time is plotted for point A to point
B, point B to point C, and point A to point C. This may lead him to
think about time, which may lead him to
think about a flow diagram or a tree diagram, or very simply a
timeline which again, he could rotate 90
degrees to create a Gantt chart or very
simply a calendar. He could take the circles
from earlier in the calendar, combine them together
to create a nightingale but a nightingale is really just a circle that's
been exploded out in all different directions.
So he could reign that in and that may lead him to
think about a pie chart, to which unfortunately, he could rotate to create a 3D pie chart. He could blow it up. He could punch a hole in
the middle of it. He could cut it in half or
he could blow it up again but all that is just a
variation on a circle. This may lead him to think about other shapes he could use, may lead him to
think about squares to create a tree map, to which he could blow up again to create a square Cloud, or he could stack on top of one another to
create a unit chart. The squares in a
unit chart may lead him to think about other
states he could use, may lead him to think about
people or an isotype chart. The people in the
isotype chart may lead him to think about
high-frequency data which may lead him to think about a
heat map or a contour map, or the truly unfortunate
3D contour map. This very simply may
lead him to think about maps to which he could add circles or squares or lines. The connections formed by the lines on the
map may lead him to think about a specific
point on this map where he's talking
about how to think carefully about creating visualizations that help
your audience find insights, make discoveries, and use
your results for impact. He can take that point
off that map and he can plot it in an XY space. If he were to give an autograph he might want a
number to go with it. That's this Graphic
Continuum project, a library of graph types
to get you thinking about all the
different ways that you can visualize your data. That there's more to the
world than line charts, pie charts, bar charts,
and area charts. The important thing to
keep in mind is that the purpose of
your visualization meets the needs
of your audience. That you think about,
who your user is, who your reader is, who your audience is. That your work tries
to help your audience do their job better so that
they can make insights, they can make discoveries, they can put your work into
practice and have an impact. What's important
is that we think carefully about all
the different arrays of visualization types that are available to us. Not because new visualization types or different visualization
types are inherently better but because sometimes
when we show data in different ways it allows us to see things
in different ways, allows our audience to see
things in different ways. I'm confident that anyone
in this room can do this. I'm confident anyone in this room can de-clutter
their graphs, that they can add
annotation to their graphs, and they can think
about their audience first when they are creating their visualizations when they're delivering
their content. I certainly learned how
to do this and I believe you can as well.
Thank you very much. 