John Campbell: When
Jim asked me to speak to this conference, it's a very intimidating
assignment. As he mentioned in our previous dinner
speakers, Steve Ross, Bob Martin, Larry Summers, this is hard acts to follow. I thought, well, I can just be a convex combination of Bob
Martin and Larry Summers. I will try to relate ideas from Bob Martin about long-term investing in
intertemporal hedging, with ideas from Larry Summers about persistent changes in rates of return or as Larry would describe it,
secular stagnation. Hence my title, long-term investing in a
non-stationary world. Let me start with
something that I think anybody who's
done empirical work and macro or finance
can relate to. I'll call it Murphy's laws
of economic time series. Murphy's first law is that
things that we always thought were constant
suddenly stopped moving. There are lots of examples. There's, for example, the labor share which we
always thought was constant back to Kaldor in 1957, hence Cobb-Douglas
production function constant labor share. Well, we now know it
seems to be moving. Or to take an example
from finance. Gene Fama wrote a paper in 1975 arguing that the
nominal interest rate is a constant real
interest rate plus inflation and the short-term real interest rate
and never moves. It was true in his dataset, but immediately after
he published his paper, Murphy's first law kicked
in and it started to move. Now Murphy's second law of economic time series is
that things we've not yet observed but that we
confidently expect to be constant, turnout to move. Milton Friedman, in advocating
floating exchange rates, famously argued that
the exchange rate would be stable because it would reflect a
long-run equilibrium and so it wouldn't
move very much. Now, coming closer
to home for me, before, tips were issued
in the late 1990s, Bob Shiller and I wrote
a piece about it and we argued that the long-term
real interest rate should be stationary because short-term real rates move but they're stationary so the long run yield should
be pretty stable, it won't move very much. Boy, were we wrong? Here's
the history going back to the late 1990s
of the 10-year tips yield and we all
know this history. I do just want to say that peak there right
around the year 2000, that's the peak of the
first tech bubble. That was the moment
when Jim Peterborough, I gave me the most fabulous
investment advice to buy inflation indexed
savings bonds. But the real twist in his
advice was to do it on the treasury website using a credit card with airline
frequent flyer miles. That's when I learned to really value Jim's investment advice. But as you can see, this
decline is very long-lasting. It accelerated after the
global financial crisis in the late 2000s, but it's a much longer and more persistent trend than that. People like Larry Summers have highlighted this and
there's been a lot of discussion about
what might cause it and what we might
see in the future. I'm not going to have too
much to say about that, but let me just emphasize that it's really
a global phenomenon. In fact, US long-term
real interest rates at about one percent today are considerably higher
than they are in many other countries. In most continental
European countries we're it still talking negative real rates at about minus 50 basis points and then the extreme
outlier is the UK, or we have an extremely
negative rate. This is really a
global phenomenon. Now, this by itself has fascinating implications that I think are really important. Basically, we all know that wealth and income don't
have the same units. It's always annoying
when people say, such and such fund
is worth more than the GDP of such
and such a country because then you're comparing
wealth with income. But when the real rate of
return is relatively stable, we can use a constant
adjustment factor to go between wealth and income. But when the real
interest rate is moving as much as we've seen, that shift is that relation. Here are a couple
of observations. One is that as real
rates have declined, claims to a long stream
of safe real income, such as a defined
benefit pension that becomes much more valuable relative to asset holdings which of course is what defined
contribution tensions are. I think this helps to explain
political conflicts over public sector pensions
in places like Wisconsin and many other places. Another point is there's
a lot of talk now about how the central banks have blown-up asset markets
and hugely benefited the old at the expense of the young because the
old own the assets. There's some truth to that
but we need to remember that what the young
own is human capital, and we don't look at
the value of that. The value of that will go up because these real rates
of return have gone down. Or we could put it the other way and say that
the high value of these financial assets owned
by the old now delivers a lower income stream
than it did before. That's an offsetting effect. I don't want to argue it's
completely offsetting, but we need to be very careful about our units now
in this environment. Now let me come back to
Murphy's laws and let me give you Murphy's third law
of economic time series, which is that things that were stationary become
non-stationary. Now, I've really lived through this because I'm
going to show you the two examples
that I've worked on, the dividend price ratio and the cyclically adjusted price
earnings or cape ratio, which again, both Bob Shiller and I worked
on this in the late 1980s. Here's the dividend
price ratio on the S&P going back to
the late 19th century, the famous Shiller dataset. When did I start working
on this time series? Well, right around 1984, which is about the
last time that that series crossed
the red line. The red line is the mean. Of course at the time, there was a lot of concern about unit roots in the macro economy. Dividends, profits, prices
all had unit roots, but we thought, the ratios of these things
will be stationary. The ratio of dividends to
prices will be stationary. We can use co-integration to model things and then
Bob and I showed that the correction to
the mean that we see in the history typically
came through price adjustments and it corresponded to return
predictability. That was all great,
except that Murphy's law kicked in and the thing no longer looks as
stationary as it did. Here's the cape
ratio same point. I got into the analysis of
this series around 1984. If you look at the
history before that, it looks much more stationary
than it has since. It is a very striking
fact that even at the bottom of the global
financial crisis, the cape ratio fell a little bit below
its long-run mean, but not that much. It's been almost
exclusively above that mean since the early 1990s. That's 25 years now. I think it's plausible
now to think that there's more non-stationarity and by that I just mean unit routes. I don't mean turtle
regime shifts, but unique routes that are floating around
in financial markets. I want to think about
non-stationarity of returns. I think it has
profound implications for investors and I'm going
to discuss three of them. Forecasting returns,
intertemporal hedging, and reaching for yield. I'm going to start with
a sensible stuff and then I plan to get more and
more funky as it goes on. I was counting on the fact that you all are drinking wine and so your critical faculties will be diminished by the end, but I hadn't counted on
the thing being taped and put online, so too bad. Let me talk now about
forecasting returns. As you may know Bob Shiller and I did work on this
back in the day, we argue that you could
predict returns from the dividend price ratio
or the cape ratio. If the ratio is way away from its mean it will tend to return to its mean and most of that adjustment will be
associated with prices. However, if the ratio is
itself non-stationary, that isn't a mean that it's
going to come back to. I think we have to take
some account of that. Now for tips you can just use
the yield and use that as, and it is of course, a forecast of return over the next 10 years if
it's a 10-year bond. But certainly that's an object that you could forecast into the longer-term future and you might treat it as a random walk. Now, it's a little harder
for stocks but I'm going to argue that it may be worth using what I call
a drifting steady-state model that generalizes
the Gordon growth model. We're going to make
the extreme assumption that the log dividend
price ratio is not just non-stationary but it actually follows
a random walk. Let's think, what
would the world look? If that's the world,
what follows? I'm going to use one
other assumption, which is the dividend
is determined one period in advance. That's the conventional
assumption of the Gordon growth model and
pretty good empirically. Then it turns out you
can derive this formula, which looks almost exactly
like our old friend, the Gordon growth model, D/P equals r minus g but
the key point here is that we've got the difference
between two expected logs, the log of the gross return, that's r, and g is the
log dividend growth rate. This formula holds in a world where the dividend
price ratio follows a random walk whereas
the traditional Gordon growth model requires that thing
to be constant. If you rearrange, of course, the expected log return
is the income from the dividend yield plus the expected log
dividend growth rate. Now why am I emphasizing
the need to use logs here or geometric averages? That's because the
volatility correction that takes you from a geometric
to an arithmetic average is different for returns
and dividend growth when the dividend price
ratio varies over time or equivalently when the expected return
varies over time. To go to an arithmetic
return you're going to have to add one-half the
variance of returns, which is greater than one-half the variance
of dividend growth. Now just as a little
reality check, in Jeremy Siegel's book, Stocks for the Long Run, he uses the Gordon growth
model and he reports the real geometric averages
of all these things over the Shiller
historical period. It lines up very
well with the model, basically 0.1 percent there in the bottom equation
is the residual so just 10 basis
points of residual. The average is lineup and income accounted for two-thirds of total return over that period. Now, you can also forecast returns using the
earnings yield. I won't go into the
detail but just as in a static model there's a payout ratio that relates
dividends to earnings. Growth comes from
profitability or ROE and the reinvestment rate. Of course, the payout ratio and the reinvestment
ratio sum to one. I'll show you some forecasts
that come from that. Essentially, if you
use this approach, the high profitability
of US companies in recent years implies
higher growth and hence higher return, which partially
offsets the decline in the earnings yield. He has an implementation,
of course, different implementations
will give you different numbers but this
is just to illustrate. We see much less of a trend
in this thing but we see some long slow movements with peaks in downturns like the tech wreck
in the early 2000s, the global financial crisis, and then a drift
downwards since then. Of course, if I put together the stock return and the tips yield I'm going to see this
view of the equity premium. I should emphasize, this is an arithmetic equity premium, so I've done the one-half
variance correction. It was very low
in the year 2000. It wasn't actually negative
but it was extremely low, 50 basis points of equity
premium at the moment when Jim was telling me to buy those inflation
index savings bonds, but much higher today, around five percent, but declining recently with the rise in the market
until very recently. Then if you want to think
about an endowment, let's say you've got
an endowment portfolio that's 60 percent stocks, 40 percent bonds, the bonds get the tips yield, the stocks earn what
I just showed you, then you'll get some drift down, more like a percentage point
down over this period. That was return forecasting. I think there's some merit
to using this type of framework rather than predicting a return to a historical mean. Now, my next topic is
intertemporal hedging. I want to show you
that basically, intertemporal hedging, the idea is really simple
in a world like this. I'm going to do two cuts. The first cut is to observe that if the
expected return is a random walk then a
constant spending ratio is not sustainable because if the expected return drifts down, your constant spending
rate is going to run down the value
of the endowment. Well, what would be a
sustainable spending rule? Well, the obvious first
thing you think of is you'll spend, you consume the expected
return on the endowment. This is the expected simple
return times wealth. That will imply that wealth
is a random walk because the expected return
is consumed and only the unexpected
return moves wealth. Now then you take the
log of that thing, c is log of C, you'll get the log of the expected return
plus the log of wealth. Now, key point to observe
here is this log of expected return is not what we usually
call a log return. Usually the r is the log
of the gross return. This is the log of the
expected net simple return. It's the log of one percent, or two percent, or
something like that. Well, what's the
conditional variance of log consumption? How much risk is there in your spending and how
much you could spend? Well, lead the consumption
equation one period, take conditional variances. It's super easy. The variance of consumption
is the variance of that expected return in
the log expected returns, so the proportional
variability of that, plus the variability
of log wealth, which is just the variance
of the unexpected return, plus twice the
covariance between them. For any given conditional
variances you can reduce the risk to spending if you have a negative covariance
between the two. That is Merton's idea of intertemporal hedging and what I think is the simplest
possible form. It's just very immediate. I think this simplicity
is valuable. I mean, here's a typically
forthright quote from John Cochrane saying, this dynamic incomplete
portfolio choice theory, it's really hard, we
can't solve the model. It's ignored. Hedge funds don't do this. Nobody cares. Why?
Because calculating partial derivatives
of unknown functions is hard and nebulous. People hate these black
boxes. Fair point. I think he's got a fair point, but I think in this
random walk world, it's actually easier to think about them than he makes out. Now actually the first cut
isn't quite good enough. Maybe I should have
just cut it from the torque. Why isn't
it good enough? Because you should object
like a random walk, expected return can go negative. I mean, maybe the
above spending rule then implies negative
consumption. Also, I stated,
and that's right, that wealth is a
random walk with zero drift in this model. But it turns out consumption has a drift with the sign
of that covariance. If you successfully into temporarily hedge and
reduce your risk, you're going to have
consumption drifting down, which you may not
like. To fix that. It's not too hard. We
can just go back to the previous drifting
steady-state model that Gordon Growth Model and just reinterpret dividend as
consumption and price as wealth. Because we know that
you can always think of consumption as the
dividend that you take out from a
wealth portfolio. For an arbitrary
portfolio consuming it, your intertemporal
budget constraint is just mapped dividend to
consumption, price to wealth. Let's see what happens
when we do that. Let's assume, as we did before, that the log consumption
wealth ratio follows a random walk. Then the drifting
steady-state model says that the consumption of wealth ratio is expected log return minus expected
consumption growth. What was a sustainable
spending rule be? It would set expected consumption
growth equal to zero. That will imply that
what you consume outer wealth is actually
the expected log return. Now, if the log of the
expected log return, if that is a random walk. In other words, if
expected return is a geometric Brownian motion, the whole model will be
internally consistent because the log consumption wealth ratio will then be a random walk. This is sort of like
Fischer Black's model in the short-term interest rate as a Geometric Brownian motion. Of course, if that's the model, the expected return
has to be positive. Consumption is positive and it's a nice model in that way. Here's the second cut version
of intertemporal hygiene. It's basically the same
thing as I said before, except we have to do, I mean, it really is the same
formula as before. The consumption variance is the variance of this change or innovation in the log
expected return plus the unexpected return variance plus twice the covariance. Now, let me just give you some numbers that I
calculated off that 60, 40 endowment portfolio
that I showed you before. If I take the expected returns that I showed you and I look at the volatility of the unexpected
returns on the assets, I find that the
standard deviation of expected return in proportional
terms is 15.7 percent. That's not percentage points, but it's percent of its value so proportional risk to
that expected return. Then the standard deviation of the unexpected return on the portfolio is
about 10 percent. That's because it's got
a lot of bonds in it. The correlation between
the two, the Rho, the correlation between the ER, and the W is minus 0.4. That comes both
from the tips where there's a huge negative
correlation and from stocks where there's also some
negative correlation because it's built into
the Gordon Growth Model. The implied standard
deviation of consumption is 14.5 percent. Now, actually,
that's higher than the single period returns standard deviation
of 10 percent, because it's a tough
world that we live in when the expected
return is varying. But if you didn't have
the negative correlation, it would be even higher. You'd have a standard
deviation for consumption growth
of 18 percent. What this tells you is that the risk-return trade-off for a long-term investor
critically involves this correlation between realized and expected
future returns not just the variance
of realized returns. Final observation. What would it take to get riskless consumption
in this model? What you would need, the
elasticity of wealth with respect to the expected
net return to be minus 1. In other words, the consumption is a product of two things. You have to get them to
perfectly offset one another. There has to be a
negative 1 elasticity. Now, I could restate
that as saying that the negative
elasticity of wealth with respect to the
expected gross return, that's duration, it has to be 1 plus expected return
divided by expected return. As the expected return falls, the duration has to go up. If we're back in the late 90s and tips yielding
three-and-a-half percent. The duration will be 30 years. If we now have a long-term
interest rate of one percent, the duration has
to be a 101 years. That may help to explain
why there is demand for very long-term bonds in a stable inflation environment with low real interest rates. Now, the final part of the talk, I want to get a little bit more creative and a little bit funky and so throw out something
and see what you think. Counting on the fact that
you've been drinking wine. I want to talk about
reaching for yield. The first I want to make is that this is sustainable spending, that can be pretty painful. I've proposed the rule. Consumption is expected
logger turn times wealth. It's sustainable
in the sense that the expected
consumption growth is zero under this condition random walk for the
log expected return. Wealth is also a
logarithmic random walk. You don't expect to run
down the endowment, you don't expect to run
down your spending. You expect to keep it the
same in a logarithmic sense. But of course, when the
expected return falls, you have to cut your spending
rate. That's very painful. In practice and dominants are extremely reluctant to do that. Harvard, for example, has had a target spending
rate of five percent, basically forever
for the whole time I've been at the university. If you've never been adjusted, a related phenomenon, I think, is the way in which public
pension plans have been slow to reduce the rate at which they discount
their liabilities. Now, we know that under bizarre accounting
rules in this country, public pension plans can use their expected return on assets to discount their liabilities, even though the liabilities are supposedly
riskless promises. If they reduce the
discount rate, then they will worsen their reported funding status and they're reluctant
to do that. This is a table taken from a recent paper by
Lipschitz and Walter, which shows the average
discount rate used by the 25 largest
public pension plans in this country over
the last decade or so. Visually this looks like they're cutting
discount rates a lot, but it's all just
because of the scale, you have to look
carefully at the scale. Actually, they've gone down by about 60 basis points on
average over this period. When tips yields, of course, have fallen by much
more than that by two and a half percentage
points and the 60, 40 portfolio, even there, the expected return has fallen by a lot more than
60 basis points. I think there's a
demonstrated reluctance to do the actual spending adjustment
that is called for. Let me now try to see
what happens if we combine this sustainable
spending idea with utility theory. Think about an investor who has an absolutely standard
power utility function with a time discount rate and a risk aversion
coefficient but who is constrained to follow the
sustainable spending rule. That's a non-standard
formulation of the investment
problem because we normally think you can
spend whatever you want according to your
utility function. But I think that the
constraint may actually capture the situation of
some long-term investors, particularly think about
a university endowment or any endowment
for that matter. Giving to the
university is a way for the donors to
achieve immortality. The university says,
"You are going to be supporting spending into
the indefinite future." The donors recognize
that there's some risk, the endowment is
invested riskily, but the university
promises not to plan to run down spending. Equally, they're not
promising to run it up. They just say that what
you can buy today in expectation you will be
able to support tomorrow. But of course, the
university is also an entity that has
spending needs and risk aversion and the
university community may discount the future
in the usual way. What if the university has
a power utility function, but faces this constraint? It turns out interesting
and funky things happen. To make this analysis tractable, let's go back to the simpler original
Gordon growth model world where investment
opportunities are constant, so that each year, little r is just Er
is just a constant. The consumption-wealth
ratio is constant. There is no intertemporal
hedging now, asset returns are iid. Log consumption is a random walk with no drift because of the
sustainable spending rule. Now, I can solve the portfolio choice problem and it's got some standard
features that pop right out. If you've got log utility you choose the growth
optimal portfolio that maximizes expected log return and therefore it also
maximizes current spending. If you're risk averse, more risk averse than the log, you choose a more
conservative portfolio. No surprises there. But the solution also has some striking
non-standard features. The first one is that as the investor becomes
more impatient, the investor takes more risk. Why is that? It's
because the benefit of risk is a higher
expected log return, which means higher spending today and we get
that immediately. The cost is more volatile future consumption,
but that's delayed. If I'm impatient, I just
want a high spending rate. I want to do whatever investment
strategy will justify a high spending rate and
get me resources now. In the limit, an extremely
impatient investor will hold the growth
optimal portfolio regardless of risk aversion, because that's the
way you get the highest possible
current spending according to this rule. Now, another, even more, I think, interesting non-standard
feature is this. Let's consider a one-time
unexpected change, sometimes called an MIT shock to investment opportunities. We were in the
constant return world, all of a sudden the return goes down and now it's going
to stay down forever. Let's suppose in particular that the riskless
interest rate declines but risk premia remain constant. In response to this shock, a conservative investor with risk aversion greater
than one will reach for yield and
take more risk. Even though in the standard
problem they wouldn't, because risk premia
haven't changed. This is just a change in the interest rate.
How can that be? Well, the first
intuition would be that a given proportional
increase in consumption, which is what has a constant
utility value to you that requires a given
proportional increase in the expected
portfolio return. If the riskless
interest rate is low, getting that it requires a smaller increase in risk than when the riskless
interest rate is high. In other words, if I start with a 50 basis point safe return, I can double my
expected return easily by just taking enough risks
to add 50 basis points. But if I start with a three
percent interest rate, the only way I can double
my return is to take three percentage points worth
of risk and that's hard. That involves a lot more risk. That's the first intuition. Another intuition would be this, at a lower riskless
interest rate, an investor with a constant
discount rate wants higher expected marginal utility in the future relative to today. That's the usual
first-order condition for intertemporal choice. Now, normally we think
you achieve that by increasing consumption today
relative to the future, you tilt your consumption path. But if you're not
allowed to do that, you can achieve it
by taking more risk. Almost the opposite of
precautionary saving. Precautionary saving is adjust your consumption path
in response to risk. This is adjust your risk because you can't adjust
your consumption path. Taking this funky perspective, risk taking is short-termism. Is basically a conflict between a sustainable spending
constraint and a utility function that
discounts the future. In the usual portfolio
choice problem, the interest rate moves, time discount rate
remains constant. Investor responds by tilting the plan consumption path
but if that's prevented, the investor might
use portfolio risk is another indirect way to trade off the present
versus the future. Chris Anderson who was here at the conference and here
tonight, he's right over there. In his job market paper, he makes the related point that anytime there's an
arbitrary consumption rule, an investor who manages the financial portfolio
taking that is given, it alters the usual
things we know and love and in particular in
his job market paper he shows that it alters
the usual formulas of consumption-based
asset pricing in a way that looks like
long-run risk models. That's Chris' paper. The point I'm making here
is in a similar spirit. I think that we're actually short of models
of reaching for yield. It's hard to get these models but considerations like
this might be helpful. I'll finish and come back to a theme, I
touched on earlier, which is this whole point
about wealth versus income. In a non-stationary world with persistent changes
in rates of return, the level of wealth and the permanent income or
sustainable spending generated by that wealth can move in very different ways. I think this creates
problems for long-term endowment managers who face outside scrutiny that focuses entirely on the
value of the endowment. I had the pleasure of having lunch with Vagard Vic
and our sponsors from Norges Bank
Investment Management and we were talking about this, the fact that there's
a lot of pressure on the fund to report the values of the fund and risk are naturally conceived off by the
Norwegian public, the government, the politicians, outside consultants
as the volatility of the endowment value. Of course, reporting
that is what the accounting profession exists in part to measure wealth, to market accounting,
to provide outside auditing of what the
value of the fund actually is at any
point in time. But if you take the perspective that I've adopted this evening, what we also need is measures of permanent income and
you can get that from wealth if you can measure the expected return
on the endowment. Now, notably, this permanent income is quite different from
current income. This is nothing to do
with what's paid out as a dividend or a coupon on a
bond or anything like that. Current income is relevant
for tax purposes, but in the absence of taxes, I would say it basically has very little economic meaning. The difficulty is that
permanent income and expected returns are hard
to measure unambiguously. I showed you plots
with expected returns, but they came out of a model
on some assumptions I made. You might have your
own favorite model and might give you
a different plot. It's going to be very hard
to do this unambiguously, but I would argue
that the benefits are large enough to justify
a substantial effort. This is really what
we want to be able to measure and if
we could direct the attention of
ultimate investors more on permanent income
or sustainable spending, and less on current values, I think it would be easier to make the right
investment decisions. 