Sergey Chernenko: This
paper is going to be on a related idea of
liquidity transformation. We know that liquidity
transformation is a key function of many
financial intermediaries. Banks are the quintessential
example here. They raise super liquid
demand deposits, invest them in illiquid loans to small and
medium-sized businesses. Since the financial crisis, there has been increasing
realization that asset managers also engage
in liquidity transformation, although perhaps not to
the same extent as banks. There is an ongoing
policy debate about the extent to which liquidity transformation
by asset managers might pose risks to
financial stability. One side of the debate are basically concerns
about the potential for fire sales where initial
negative performance, under-performance leads to investors to withdraw money
from an asset manager, causing the asset
manager to liquidate some of their illiquid assets, exerting negative
price pressure, leading to more outflows. On the other side of the debate are basically two arguments. One is that asset managers
are simply acting as pass-throughs buying and selling securities on behalf
of the investors. The other argument is
that they do in fact, already have liquidity
management programs in place that mitigates
all of these risks. Now let me be a little bit more clear about what we have in mind by liquidity transformation and how are we going to be
trying to measure it? What we have in mind is that
investors face basically a different price-quality
schedule when dealing with an intermediary than when transacting
on their own. For banks, investors
can withdraw unlimited quantities of deposits without any price impact. On the other hand,
if they were to somehow transact in bank
loans on their own, they would potentially face
a significant price impact. Now for banks, we can
relatively easily measure liquidity transformation
just like by looking up their
maturity transformation. Because there is a
maturity mismatch between the liabilities to deposits
and their assets to loans. It's a little bit more
difficult to measure liquidity transformation
by asset managers because for most of them, there is not going to
be a maturity mismatch, but there's still
going to be performing liquidity transformation. Specifically in the setting that we're going to be thinking about open-end mutual funds, investors basically can transact whatever quantities they
want at the fixed end of day nav without effectively internalizing any price impact that they might be
exerted on the prices. If they were to
trade on their own, obviously, they would face
a different price quantity scheduled then if they're trading through the mutual fund. Effectively what's going
to be happening is that the mutual fund is
going to be pooling the transaction and
liquidation costs across both investors who are
not trading in the fund and the investors who
are actually trading, either putting capital into
the font or withdrawing it. The key idea in the paper
than to try to measure liquidity transformation of asset managers are
going to be to take a revealed preference
approach in a sense. We're going to look at their cash holdings and
argue that the way that asset managers manage
their own liquidity helps us shed light on how much liquidity transformation
they're performing. For example, if they
were acting simply as pass-throughs buying and selling securities on behalf
of the investors, there's not going to be
any need for them to hold any of their own cash. If, on the other hand, funds are performing substantial liquidity
transformation then there you're
going to rely on cash to help manage some of these liquidation costs or mitigate their
liquidation costs. That's going to be the
basic idea in the paper. We're going to look
at it in the context of open-end mutual funds. A few reasons to look
at open-end funds. One is that there is significant scope for
liquidity transformation. A good example would
be loan mutual funds. These are fonts that basically invest in syndicated loans. Interesting fact about
this is that when they trade they basically
settle T plus 14, while the funds themselves
are effectively promising their investors next day
liquidity on settlement. You see them growing a
lot since the crisis, and in fact, more broadly, a lot of the growth
of mutual funds since the crisis has been an asset classes that are less liquid and potentially that where there is more scope for
liquidity transformation. The other two reasons for
that mutual funds are large and they also
hold a lot of cash. It's potentially interesting
just to understand this demand for cash
and money like assets. MALE_1: [inaudible]
big volatility of growth that is all left out, like a million goes in and a
million goes out zero left. Is that built liquidity
transformation [inaudible]. Sergey Chernenko:
Part of it will be come from the fact that they're offsetting their nodding
flows within themselves. What am I going to be
looking at the data? We're going to be looking at the volatility of net flows. I'll skip this for
interests of time. Basically, outline for
the rest of the talk is to briefly talk about the framework that we
have in the paper. Talk a little bit
about the data and then get to the results. In the paper, we have a simple model of optimal
cash holdings for a fund. Where we think about
a fund as facing uncertain liquidity
shocks from investors who might withdraw
some of their cash on the funders optimal way, setting its cash holdings to manage its costs and managing
liquidity transformation. I'm not going to go
through the model here, but just want to
simply go through the key predictions from
the model, outline them. The first two
predictions look at dynamics of cash management. The basic idea here is that if funds are acting
as pass-throughs, they're not going to be any
need for them to hold cash. Or stated differently,
if the assets were perfectly liquid that the
funds were investing in, then there would also
be no need for cash. They would always just
immediately trade in the underlying. To the extent that
funds are actually engaging in liquidity
transformation, they might not act
as pass-throughs. They might want to use some of their cash holdings to
accommodate their farm flows. Related to that is the idea that in both the cross-section
and the time series, the more liquidity
transformation funds engage in specifically the more illiquid assets that they invest in, the more aggressive
they will be in using cash to
accommodate fund flows. The second set of
predictions looks at the level of cash holdings or specifically the fraction, the cash to total assets ratio. Here in the model, we can actually show that the optimal cash ratio is proportional to the fund's
expected liquidation costs, like its price impact. The idea here is simple that in the model there is no
time-varying returns. So the only reason for a font
to actually hold cash is that it thinks that its alternative is
selling illiquid assets, which is going to exert
a lot of price impact. The more price impact the font would exert if it were
to liquidate its assets, the more cash it
would want to hold. The funds that are
expect to incur a lot of liquidation costs
are the ones that in equilibrium are going
to hold a lot of cash, but they will still
exert some price impact. The model focuses on three variables that
are going to be our key proxies for
liquidity transformation, which has the volatility
of fund flows. This is basically
investor demand for liquidity from the fund, the illiquidity of the assets,
and their interaction. It's really the interaction
that's going to be driving a lot of the results. That if our investors
demand a lot of liquidity and our assets are illiquid is when we really
wanted to hold a lot of cash to mitigate some of
the liquidation costs. The final prediction thinks
about the social optimal. Funds are going to hold less cash than the
social planner would. The intuition here is simple. It's sort of like the
analog of leverage or a fire sale externality, a given fund when it sends
its cash is not going to internalize the fact that
if it holds more cash, that raises the prices at which everyone else is
able to transact. When we look at the data, we're going to try
to think about situations where funds
are more likely to internalize their
price impact and show that these kind of
fonts hold more cash. A little bit about the data. We have novel data
set on cash holdings. This comes from SEC Form N-SAR, which is a semi-annual
questionnaire with basic information about fund's fees investment
practices, asset composition. We're going to measure
cash as cash itself, which is basically deposits, repo, short-term securities. Other than repo, so this is mostly T bowls in
commercial paper. This category of
other investments, which in practice
actually mostly consists of money
market mutual funds. But it will show
that the results are robust to excluding
that category. We're going to link
this to crisp for more characteristics of funds. We're going to measure
portfolio liquidity as simply devaluated average of the liquidity of the
individual securities. I'm going to do this both for equity funds and bond funds and present the results
for equity and bond funds. This is the first set of results that looks at
the dynamics of cash. The dependent variable here
is the change in cash over a six-month period scaled
by assets six month ago. The explanatory variables are flows during each one
of the six month, also scaled by asset
six month ago, so the interpretation here
is dollar-for-dollar change. One dollar of flows during the current month t
is associated with 23 cents change in
cash for equity funds. This effect persists but
declines slowly over time. Columns 4 through 6 look at slightly different
dependent variable, which is the change in
the cash-to-assets ratio. Here, you see the cash-to-assets
ratio increasing, so it's telling us
that it's not simply that funds are scaling their
portfolios up and down, it's actually that when
they receive inflows, their cash-to-assets ratio
increases temporarily, when they receive outflows, their cash-to-assets
ratio declines. Similar results for bond funds. Here, a dollar of
flows during month t is associated with cash
changing by 32 cents. I state these results
here as outflows, but it's really basically symmetrical for inflows
versus outflows. The fact that it's stronger for bond funds is
potentially consistent, whereas the notion
that these funds are investing in
less liquid assets. We're going to look
more close at in this next set of tables that interacts fund flows
with asset or liquidity. For simplicity,
instead of looking at monthly fund flows, we're going to look at
quarterly fund flows, we'll get similar results
looking at monthly, but we are going to interact
quarterly fund flows with the illiquidity of the assets that we started the period with. You can see here, is that flows during quarter t have a positive effect
on our cash holdings, and interaction with illiquidity is positive and
statistically significant, so the interpretation
here is that a one standard
deviation increase in asset illiquidity increases the sensitivity of cash to
flows by about 20 percent for equity funds and about
25 percent for bond funds. We get similar results
looking in the time series at periods of flow aggregate
market liquidity. Again, this is equity funds, during periods of low
aggregate market liquidity, the sensitivity of
cash to fund flows is significantly larger than
during other periods. Similar point estimates for
bond funds a little here, not statistically
significant, we have a somewhat shorter time
series for bond funds. The next set of results looks at the cash-to-assets ratio. Here it's expressed
in percentage points and all of the variables
are standardized, so the coefficients represent the effect of one standard
deviation change. You can see that all of our three proxies basically for liquidity transformation, the volatility of flows, the illiquidity of the assets, and the interaction of
the two are positive, statistically
significant and have sizable effects on the
cash-to-assets ratio. I should point out
that for funds, basically, that have
their illiquid asset, so say they are two
standard deviations below the mean in
terms of illiquidity, flows basically have no effect on the cash-to-assets ratio. This is basically multiplying
the coefficient and the interaction term by minus 2, adding these up together, so for that kind of fund, flows don't have any effect
on the cash-to-assets ratio, it's really only for funds that invest in relatively
illiquid assets that the volatility of fund flows has an effect
on cash-to-assets ratio. In the paper, we do a number of robustness
checks looking that the results are not
driven by small versus large funds or before
or after the crisis, we find broadly similar results. We also look at a number of
alternative explanations. One would be that funds
have lower cash holdings when they expect future returns to be high or
volatility to be low. Now, you would expect that
most of this variation would be at the
objective time level, so there will be certain
periods of time where everyone expects returns on say, small-cap growth to be high, and so all small-cap growth managers basically
have low cash holdings. Our specifications control for objective time fixed effects, so it should pick up most of this variation, but
for robustness, we also tried controlling
for future returns for the fund that doesn't have any effect on our liquidity
transformation proxies. Another alternative
explanation is that concentrated
managers may want to hold more dry powder to take advantage of investment
opportunities as they arise and perhaps this is also
correlated with investing in relatively
illiquid assets. We tried controlling
for it using proxies for following
dry powder strategy, so concentration of portfolio
holdings and the share of the largest holding. These come in positively insignificant suggesting
that these types of funds do have
higher cash holdings, but it has no effect on our
key variables of interest. We also tried to address
the concern that maybe cash holdings reflect
managerial risk aversion, we throw a bunch of
manager characteristics, those don't seem
to matter at all. Getting to the price impact. Our model in most serious would suggest that funds
wouldn't fully internalize the price
impact that they might have when trading
in the securities. We're going to try to think
about settings where funds are more likely to internalize
their price impact. One setting would
be a monopolist, so to gather data, we're going to look
at the fraction of the outstanding securities
that a given fund holds. The more of the outstanding
that a given fund holds, the larger are going to
be its cash holding. It's true for equity funds, we don't find this for bond
funds, but for bond funds, it's a little bit
more challenging to determine a priori which securities are
closer substitutes as opposed for equities. Then the other idea is to look at overlapping holdings between funds in a given fund family. If I'm a fund and I'm deciding
how much cash to hold, I know that there is overlap in my holdings with other
funds in the family. If there's such overlap, I might worry that if I have to sell a lot
of my own holdings, that will have a negative effect on other funds in the family. When we try to measure overlap with other
funds in the family, we find that funds
that have overlap in holdings tend to hold more cash basically as a
precaution not to exert this negative externality on the other funds in the family. So far I've been
talking about cash as basically taking it as the only liquidity
management tool that funds have
available to them. In the paper, we discuss
a number of alternatives, so lines of credit, in-kind redemptions,
redemption fees, and interfund lending programs. In practice, it seems
that funds don't really rely all that much on
these alternatives, and our evidence suggest that an equilibrium fund still
rely on cash holdings. But we also show that we get similar results when we split
the sample into funds that have these alternative
liquidity management tools in place versus the funds
that don't have them. To conclude, we take revealed-preference
approach by looking at how mutual funds manage their own
cash holdings to help shed light on how much liquidity transformation
they're engaging in. We find that funds,
first of all, they use cash to accommodate
inflows and outflows, and their level of cash
holdings is driven to a large extent by how much liquidity transformation
they're performing, so how volatile their flows are and the illiquidity
of their assets. The two implications
of our findings, one is that liquidity
transformation in asset management depends
to a large extent on liquidity provision by the
traditional banking and also the shadow banking sectors because to provide liquidity
to their investors, mutual funds have to
hold a lot of cash and cash-like securities that are supplied by
these other sectors. Another takeaway is that
despite their size, cash holdings of mutual funds might not be large enough to mitigate the price impact that they're exerting on
the markets. Thank you. 