Joshua Rauh: The motivation
behind the paper is that it's well known
that infrastructure is an essential component of competitiveness and long
run growth in any economy. There's a lot of work
in economics on this. Recently, there's
also been a number of organizations that have
highlighted the gap between the demand for infrastructure and the provision of capital for
infrastructure. Some numbers that are often seen
in popular reports are, for example, from the US American Society of
Civil Engineers, claiming that the US requires $2 trillion of an
additional infusion of investment relative to planned infrastructure
investment resources. The World Bank which
looks at this issue from a global perspective and
argues that there is a $15 trillion gap
between the global need and projected
infrastructure investment through the year 2040. At the same time, institutional
investors have become more active in supplying capital to infrastructure in essence
as a new asset class. If we look at this from
the perspective of some large limited partners out there or large institutional
investors, CalSTRS is doubling its allocation
to infrastructure from two percent to four
percent of its $230 billion in assets. The Norwegian sovereign
wealth fund is going to start investing two percent
of its assets, which would amount to
around $20 billion in unlisted renewable
energy infrastructure. If we look at the
general partners the infrastructure funds that are supplying the funds that these LPs are investing
in we see some very, very large players now
that are emerging. Just as one recent example, Blackstone is working on a $40 billion Blackstone
infrastructure fund, which includes $20
billion of commitment from Saudi Arabia
and so far $2.5 billion from other sources, including US public
pension fund LPs. The total amount of assets
under management that institutional investors have in close infrastructure
funds is a number that's not actually
that easy to calculate. In this work I'm going
to show you that we estimate that
currently there's around $404 billion in assets under management by close
infrastructure funds. This is as the end of
last year, and this is up almost seven times
over the last 10 years. With all this as backdrop, the true risk and return
characteristics of infrastructure investments
or infrastructures and asset class are not really
known and so that's one of the questions we're
trying to get it in this research.  Well, it's
worth asking what do institutional investors
expect that they're getting from infrastructure?
We see this a lot. The answer is usually that they expect that they're getting, or at least convey that they believe
that they're getting steady cash flows
in the long run and diversification
benefits due to low correlations with
other asset classes. For example, if you look
at the CalPERS websites as of late summer of last year, it stated that
Infrastructure targets stable defensive investments
within the water, energy, waste, transportation, technology, and
communications sectors. My key emphasis would be on the word stable and defensive. Other work has looked
at infrastructure and stated that is supposed to
offer investors long-term, low-risk, inflation-protected
and a-cyclical returns. Then Norwegian government's
sovereign wealth fund in their consideration
of investing in an unlisted renewable
energy infrastructure have stated that this
is not a climate policy measurement rather
they're going to be subject to the same
profitability and transparency requirements as the other investments
of the fund. At the same time as the LPs are saying this is
what they're looking for, the financial industry is essentially arguing that's
what they are providing. Deutsche Bank Asset
Management says that infrastructure offers
relatively low long-term, cash-flow volatility compared
with other asset classes and can also provide attractive
inflation hedge returns. J.P. Morgan Asset Management
states its case for infrastructure on the
basis of the benefits of diversification,
inflation protection, and yield along with the
strong focus on ESG, environmental, social, and
governance principles. What we're doing in this
research is three things. First of all, we're going
to in essence assess these claims or
these perceptions of infrastructures
and asset class. We're going to do
that by studying the payout profile of
infrastructure fund investments. Our data allow us
a look into 1,594 institutional investors who
on average are obtaining exposure to 47 underlying
infrastructure deals. I think one of the
interesting aspects of this work is that while we are looking at
fund investments, we're actually able
to drill down to the level of the deal or we're
able to look at what are the actual deals that
institutional investors are being exposed to through
this fund structure. Looking at the payout profiles, we find that compare to some other private investment
alternative asset classes, such as leveraged buyout
and real estate funds, the frequency and amounts of capital calls and distributions are actually quite similar. Then in our analysis, infrastructure funds do not
appear to be providing in essence that we could measure more stable and
longer-term cash flows. They seem to be generating cash primarily by selling assets in a way that looks fairly
similar to something between buyout and
real estate funds. That's when we model our
infrastructure funds what we're finding. Second, we find that there's
considerable heterogeneity in performance by the
type of investor. In particular, if we look at public investors which
are public pension funds, sovereign wealth funds,
and government agencies, what do we find there?
We see that within the fund structure we
see lower exit rates, we see worse net IRR, and we see lower multiples invested capital and lower PMEs. Critically, these calculations
are robust to controlling for characteristics such as project stage and the
contract characteristics, but also the industry of the actual deals
that are underlying the funds and the
locations of these deals. So that in doing so, we think that we're
actually capturing a reasonably rich
measure of asset type. I'll discuss a lot more
whether I think we're controlling for risk or not and that's going to be one of
the main questions of these. Can we think of these as
risk-adjusted in any way? Typically, we can't
think of an IRR as being a risk-adjusted
thing or a multiple. I think one of the
nice things that we do have we know what the
underlying assets are, so we know that we're comparing, in a sense, windmills to
windmills as opposed to windmills to hospitals when we're looking at
these differences. Third, given that public
investors are under performing in their infrastructure
fund investments relative to a range of
different benchmarks, we calculate the subsidy or implicit subsidy from
public investors to infrastructure at
current exposure levels. I mentioned before
there are around $404 billion of assets
under management. That's our estimate of institutional money in
infrastructure funds. Around 42 percent of that, or around 173 billion
is provided by these public
investors so most is public pension funds and
sovereign wealth funds. Given that they are
under performing, we are able to measure
that under performance. Those are resources
that are in essence lost by the public
sector that there is an implicit subsidy by the taxpayer backers of
these public entities. We estimate the substantive
variety of different ways. If the benchmark is relative to other institutional
investors, public versus private, the subsidy is around
two-and-a-quarter billion dollars per year. If we do it relative to listed infrastructure funds
as the benchmark that these public investors should be reaching in their closed infrastructure fund investments, we find around 2.86
billion per year. If we look relative to
the public investors' own real estate and/or
own buyout funds from the same vintage year as the benchmark that
they should be hitting, then we get a pretty
wide range of under performance that
could go from 1.48 billion if they're only
expected to perform as well as a real estate fund or 8.45 billion if they're expected
to perform as well as their bio funds which have performed
actually quite well. That's the overview of
what we're doing here. The data come from the Preqin
Infrastructure Database. We have, as I mentioned, 1,594 institutional
investors classified into a variety of
different types. The key distinction
is going to be the public
institutional investors versus the private
institutional investors. We have 353 public
pension funds, they are the largest class of public investors in
both US and non-US. This is global data. On the private side,
the largest type of institutional investor are the 497 private pension funds. Also, we have
insurance firms and banks and endowments and
foundations rounding out the private
institutional investors. This is over a time
period of 1991-2018. We also do know direct deals. There's 1,721 direct
investments where the institutional
investor is investing directly in
infrastructure assets. I understand that the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and our participant here from there is doing
a lot of this thing. We do know what those
direct investments are, although we are focusing
our performance analysis on the fund investments
because that's what we have performance data on. But we do know something about who's making direct
investments. I'll be able to show you some
statistics about that. Ultimately, these funds are
leading to an exposure of the institutional investors of 4,825 unique
infrastructure assets. An asset is literally a
project or a project company, and so at the end of the day, we end up with 62,000
investor deal observations. We have many investors
obviously having exposure to the same deal, either through the same
or different funds. Just to be clear,
when I say an asset, all of these 4,800 assets. The six major industry groups
are traditional energy, renewable energy, transportation, social
utilities, and telecom. There's a range of
different assets that underlie what people
are calling infrastructure. Again, one of the features of our analysis is
that we actually do know in the funds what the exact assets are that
they're investing in, so we can, in our performance, measure regression's control for some of these characteristics. Just to do a graphical
diagram of how I was saying that the different
institutional investors gain exposure to these assets, you can see on that left vertical bar there that's maybe a little
small to read, but that says 1,594
institutional investors; there are many
different ways that they're gaining exposure to the individual
infrastructure assets of which there are 4,826. The top line shows the
direct investments that they are making and the box in the middle is
showing how they're getting exposure through
external asset managers who are serving as the GPs. They're either
through closed funds, that's the majority
of the cases, the 421 closed funds, which explains the
grand majority of the investor by
asset observations. They also are gaining
access through some listed funds and
through open-ended funds. We're focusing a lot
on the closed funds, looking at the performance of different types of
institutional investors in their closed funds. This graph shows
infrastructure assets under management by institutional
investors around the world through closed
funds over time and we have to calculate this
from the data that we have. This is based on
annual snapshots with the unrealized value of assets managed by the closed funds, so the inputs to
figuring this out are residual value
to paid-in capital, which is reported by
many of the funds into dollar amounts
using the percentage of capital called the fund size. There are a number of
instances where funds don't report RVPI and we have
to do some imputations. I won't go through the
details underlying this, but this is the method through which we're able to
estimate that there's around $404 billion in infrastructure assets
under management through closed funds by
social investors. That 404 billion
is the 2018 line, the sum of the blue
and the light gray, where the blue are the ones that have reported
and the light gray are the ones where we're having
to do some more imputations. That doesn't include listed
and open-ended funds, and it doesn't include
the direct investments. This is a snapshot of
the closed fund space. Here's an example
of the way that we can drill down to these things. This is the Chicago
Parking Meter System, a pretty famous infrastructure deal or maybe infamous
infrastructure deal. Because Morgan Stanley
Infrastructure and their fund North Haven Infrastructure
Partners was viewed as having gotten a very
good deal on buying the rights to run
those parking meters, and so we're able to see the stakes of different
investors when this deal was made and also we're able to
drill down as well to who the LP investors are of North Haven
Infrastructure Partners. We can see that
ultimately exposure to North Haven Infrastructure
Partners or exposure to this parking
meter deal through North Haven Infrastructure
Partners is happening through this fund and a range of different
types of LPs in different countries are
investors in that fund. Maybe another way to show
the richness of the data is to show how we're able to
see the investment stakes. How the investment
stakes change over time. This is London City
Airport, which is another example of a
major infrastructure asset. Global Infrastructure
Partners and AIG financial products were the original owners of this during the formation of
the joint venture in 2006. Global Infrastructure
Partners then became 100 percent investor when AIG
financial products exited. Then you can see by February 2016 they
exited to other holders, primarily public pension funds and sovereign wealth funds
who are owning it directly. The data are fairly rich. I'm going to skip
ahead to now showing some of the performance
analysis that we've done. As I mentioned, institutional
investors expect long-term stable and
predictable cash flows from infrastructure. Given that infrastructure
funds seem to be the primary way that certainly the US
public pension investors are accessing this asset
class and also still a major way that many global public investors are accessing this asset class, we thought we would
be useful to look at the various performance
measures and their distribution relative to other types of investments. This just shows for
infrastructure buyout, venture capital and real estate. What are the PMEs
IRRs, and multiples? This is for all investors, not only the public's, I'll do the public-private
split in a minute. But you can see that the
infrastructure PME is about 0.93 and compared to say, buyout, buyout is
the asset class where the best performance
on a PME basis. The actual level of performance for
infrastructure compared to buyout and even
compared to venture is pretty low compared to real
estate is maybe comparable. Then we can also look at
the standard deviations of these various statistics to get one initial look at the
risk of these things. Certainly it doesn't appear that the infrastructure
is less risky than real estate or buyout
on the basis of just this cross-sectional
standard deviation of these different measures, venture is probably more risky. If you look at the entire
distribution of PMEs by fund, you can see the black line
here is infrastructure. I guess the point that we're trying to make is that there's no real sense in which these
infrastructure funds are delivering something to institutional
investors that is like a much flatter
distribution of outcomes. It looks pretty similar to
the other private fund types. Digging deeper into that, we're looking at the capital calls
and the distributions of infrastructure versus
other private fund types. These are standardized
so you can imagine this is reflecting
what would happen if an institutional
investor committed $10 million to one of
these types of funds. These lines, maybe a
little hard to read them, one of them is infrastructure, one is buyout, one is
real estate, one is VC. The fact that you maybe
can't read the labels isn't that important
because actually these lines look pretty similar. That's the whole point. The amount of capital call by infrastructure funds over
time is statistically and economically indistinguishable
from the amount of capital called by
buyout and VC funds. The left is the number of
capital calls over time. The right is more
formed because it's the average amount of
capital calls over time. Difference is real estate funds are the ones who are
calling a lot of capital at the very beginning and have less
frequent calls later. Maybe there's a little bit of that going on with
infrastructure. I think reading
this on the calls, we'd say infrastructure is between buyout and real estate. In fact, on the distributions, we would say something
rather similar. The payout profile provided by the infrastructure funds
over time is statistically economically quite similar
to the payoff profile provided by buyout and
real estate funds. Over here we have the average amount distributions over time. Buyout is actually
distributing more, this is reflective of
their better performance. Infrastructure in here,
looks like a hybrid between real estate and buyout. Really not much
difference there. We then go and we look
at the differences in different types of investors,
public versus private. We do this a few different ways. We look at the various fund level performance
measures that are familiar to people who study these private alternative
asset classes. Then we also look at
some deep level analysis using the proxy of exiting an investment in a closed fund as a proxy for performance. We don't just do it, we also validate that
in a couple of ways. Let me show you
what we do there. Public investors
under-perform in this regression on all
of these measures. We have the percent exited deals as one possible
dependent variable. We have the net IRR, the multiple invested
capital and the PME. On exited deals, what does this mean? This means that when
a public investor is investing in a fund that the percentage
hazard rate of deal exit is three
percentage points lower. Net IRR of LP fund pairs is 1.3 percentage points
lower for public investors. The multiples are
lower and the PMEs are 4.1 percentage points lower. We're clearly seeing under-performance by
public investors. Where's it coming from? A lot of it is coming
from pension funds. It depends on the measure
that you're using. In some cases it's showing up
in sovereign wealth funds. But a lot of it is showing up in US public pension funds or
non-US public pension funds. They're doing worse than private sector
investors who invest in this asset class through
the fund structure. Just to validate,
I was mentioning, we think the percentage
of exited deals is not a bad proxy for performance. We can validate that by actually looking at how the percentage of exit deals varies with these
other performance measures, net IRR multiple and PME. It goes in the direction
that you would expect. In the context of
a fund structure, having more exits is
what's generating lots of IRR or multiple PME. The reason this is useful is because in some of
the specifications, in some cases there's certain funds that don't report
net IRR or multiple PME, but we do know the
investments that they make so it's a useful additional
performance measure. I know that I don't have
that much time left, so I want to just
briefly mention the calculations of
the implicit subsidy from public investors
to infrastructure. As I said, we do this in
a few different ways. I guess gets broadly
similar range estimates for this implicit subsidy. Relative to other investors, meaning to private investors, public investors from
that regression have 1.3 percentage points
lower net IRR. Multiplied by their
entire exposure to the infrastructure
asset class, if you believe that IRR can be used as a return
measure in this way, that would be a
two and a quarter billion dollar annual subsidy. Now, we know that you
can't just think of an IRR as being like a return. We're looking at this in
a few different ways. The idea is none of these
is going to be perfect, but we're going to get estimates across and they're
pretty similar. We can look relative to other comparable risk
opportunities like a PME relative to the S&P 500 or relative to the list
of infrastructure funds. Relative to the S&P 500, the calculation ends up being around one-and-three-quarter
billion a year. Relative to listed
infrastructure funds, the private funds have done
actually quite poorly. There, again, you would
see this type should be $2.86 billion subsidy over
the lifetime of the funds. Then finally, relative to their own real estate
and buyout investments, as I mentioned at the beginning, there's a pretty wide range
of possibilities there relative to real estate. If there were only supposed to performance as well
as real estate, then the subsidy is only
one-and-a-half billion. If they're supposed to have
performed as well as buyout, then it'd be more like
eight-and-a-half billion. The fact that we get to
these different measures of the implicit subsidy from these different ways
of looking at it, even though none is perfect, suggests to us that we're
at least in the ballpark. To conclude, the main investment approach
in infrastructure, closed funds, currently is not meeting investor
expectations. Public investors are
exposed to deals for a longer period of time
and are under performing. We're able to control in a fairly rich way for
project stage, contract characteristics, industry
and location controls. I mentioned the value of the backers of these
public investment funds wherever they may be taxpayers
or the general public, the infrastructure which I guess I would
summarize as being on average around two-and-a-half
billion dollars per year. I guess I'll just end by saying, why do we think
this is happening? What do we think is going on? Didn't make it into the slides, but it is in the latest
draft of the paper. We do look a lot at
the extent to which the investments are local to the LP where their LPs are getting exposure
to local investments, so is the case that CalSTRS is primarily supporting
California investments. It turns out that it's
not primarily driven by home location investments. In fact, if you
drill down, USLPs, it's less than five percent of their deal exposure
actually ends up being to local
infrastructure where local is defined as
within the state. If you define local as
being within a country, it's about maybe a
quarter globally. The effect is not
primarily driven by this subsidy being
in a targeted way, which means that our
conclusion is that a lot of this may be related to pension funds'
willingness to take on more marginal
investments in order to meet a desired
higher allocation to private equity or related private equity asset
classes and/or having a general impact
target that they can say positive things
about in a public forum. 