Lawrence Summers:
Suppose you ran an institution that was
heavily endowment financed and suppose you had
decided in 1999 or 2000 that the
correct payout ratio for your institution
was five percent. What should you think is the
correct payout ratio today? Assume that nothing else about your institution except changes in the economy has taken place. There are a whole set of issues about how much you should
care about today and how much you should
care about the future and what about your
future fundraising? A whole set of
questions like that. I'm abstracting from
all those questions. I'm simply saying, if you
thought five percent was the right answer or you
thought six percent was the right answer
in the late 1990s, what should you think is
the right answer today? I believe that the answer to that question is probably
something below three percent. I think that is a
conclusion that is inconsistent with the behavior of most endowment
run institutions, is inconsistent with the
planning assumptions of most pension funds and is
therefore suggestive of fairly consequential and
serious problems down the road. Let me explain why
I have that view. If you take 10-year index bonds in the United States
or in Britain, where they exist, or you construct the most
plausible proxies that you can construct for 10-year index
bonds in Europe and Japan, you will conclude that
their real yield has decreased by 300 basis
points over that interval. You can argue that there are liquidity effects and that
the bonds have become more liquid or less liquid,
probably more liquid. You can make various
constructions based on swap spreads, but you will have a
difficult time, I believe, convincing yourself
that the number is outside of the range
250 basis points to 350 basis points for a proxy for the global long-term
real interest rate. You can construct
inflation swaps, take inflation swaps from
long-term nominal yields, a lot of things you can do. I don't think you're
going to have an easy time getting
to some answer different vastly from
300 basis points. Probably, if you took the calculation
somewhat further back, you wouldn't have
10-year index bonds in the United States. But if you took the calculation back another 10-15 years, you probably would
have higher proxy for long-term real yields. If the right reading of the stream of
backward-looking evidence on real yields was X in
the late 20 years ago, it is probably X minus 3 today. That's Proposition 1. Proposition 2, there are an abundance of
reasons for thinking that the fundamentals of
the real interest rate have come down
substantially over time. I think it is best to think of long-term real
interests straight, as being determined by the supply of saving and
the demand for investment. There are a variety
of factors that increase the supply of saving. More wealth inequality, more a higher share of income
going to profits, more capital export
from emerging markets, more uncertainty and
longer life expectancy, raise in personal savings, to take just some examples. There are a variety of
structural factors operating to reduce the demand
for investment. Slower labor force growth, possibly slower
productivity growth. Most importantly, the fact that capital goods have
become much cheaper and so the dollar
volume of investment to purchase a given level of
capital has come way down. My smartphone has more
computing power than a Cray supercomputer
did in 1993. When that Cray supercomputer
cost $50 million. These observations come together in a news event of
the last few days, Apple's decision to disperse $100 billion in dividends
and share repurchases. Think about it, i f the most
successful, highest valued technologically innovative
growth company finds that it is so short of investment opportunities
relative to cash flow that it is disbursing
funds on that scale, something very important
and structural is happening that is operating to lead
to low real interest rates. So there is very little I would submit to
suggest that this is likely to be a
transitory phenomenon. If one looks at 30-year
real interest rates, they are not much higher than 10-year real interest rates and in some countries like Britain, the real yield curve
actually slopes downwards. If one thinks about these kinds of
structural factors, particularly the
demassification of the economy is
likely to continue. Consider, for example, that law firms now need 600
square feet per lawyer, whereas they used to need 1,200 square feet per lawyer
because there are many fewer paralegals and
many fewer filing cabinets. Consider what the
impact of Amazon is on the demand for mall space, or the demand for
warehouse space. Real interest rates are
substantially lower, there is substantial
structural explanation for the fact that they are lower and that is
likely to persist. Observation 3, which
is parenthetical. This is what is driving what many regard as
troubling policy sects. Everybody says, not everybody, but many in the
financial community, and I think they're
mostly misguided, say, isn't it terrible
the United States has such big budget deficits? Isn't terrible that the Fed
has such huge balance sheet? Isn't it terrible that
interest rates are still so low when we have 4.1
percent unemployment rate? Imagine that all those
things were fixed at once, what would happen to
aggregate demand? Take three percent off
the budget deficit, push interest rates up
200 basis points and the economy is surely
growing two or three percentage points slower, and that means that it is
very close to recession. What I just said about the
United States is even more true in Japan and in Europe. What are seen as imprudent exogenous
policy settings are, in fact, better viewed as endogenous responses
to the surfeit of private savings relative
to private investment. Observation 4, what about expected returns on endowments? The simplest model to have, the most straightforward
model to have, the one that would come out of an elementary
finance textbook, would be that risky assets have an expected return that
is equal to the return on safe assets plus a risk premium, and that there is
no necessary reason why a risk premium would need to be changed just because the riskless rate
went up or went down. If you took that model, you would say that
the expected return on a portfolio with given risk should have
declined by 300 basis points, and so if five percent, where your endowment
payout before, two percent should be your
endowment payout today. What plausibly has
happened to risk premiums? Here would be at
least a compendium of the arguments as I
would understand them. On the side of believing that risk premiums have come down, you would have the
considerations that lower rates and the need for
return have caused a significant fraction
of investors to increase their risk appetite
and that has led to lower expected returns
going forward. You would have the
observation with respect to the current moment
that measures of price earnings
ratios do not appear abnormally low and perhaps
appear abnormally elevated. That's something similar
is probably true with respect to price
to rent ratios, and then something similar
is probably true with respect to credit spreads. You would have the
considerations, though I would tend to
minimize their significance, that many believe that quantitative easing
policies have operated to reduce
risk premiums and encouraged people
into riskier assets to the extent that term
premiums have declined, it may even be that ex-ante returns have
declined even more. Those would be the
arguments that risk premiums have declined. I don't think they're
actually that persuasive. The contrary argument
would have to be of the form that
actually people have for some set of reasons
become more risk averse or safe assets
have become scarce, and therefore they
are commanding a substantial price
premium and that risk premiums have increased, perhaps because of a
shortage of safe assets. Why anybody could suppose
that during an era of massive production of
long-term government debt due to enlarge deficits, that somehow there is a shortage of government debt that is artificially
depressing its yield by inflating its price. I can not fully imagined, but that argument is made. My reading of the evidence would be that the assumption of constant risk premiums is probably a somewhat
optimistic assumption, and that it is actually quite plausible that risk
premiums have declined. To the extent that risk
premiums have declined, it would be reasonable
to suppose that the appropriate payout
ratio would have declined by more than
the 300 basis point, decline in long-term
real yields. Far we've made a case
for 300 basis point, but probably with an add factor, more plausible than a
subtraction factor. Consideration 5, what about the
ability to add Alpha? If somehow the underlying
market risk premium has stayed the same but investors have discovered
the ability to add more Alpha over time, then at least for those
investors who've discovered the ability to add
more Alpha over time, it must be the case that there is a change
in the payout ratio. But how should we
think about that? It may be that someone
in this room is really a genius and has figured out
a really clever strategy. It might even be that somebody's
figured out a strategy that's so clever that even though they manage
several $100 billion, they can generate
significant Alpha. But by definition,
the search for Alpha is a zero-sum game and then for everybody
who gets positive Alpha, there must be someone else
who gets negative Alpha. What are the most
plausible theories of the provision of negative Alpha? Retail traders. They are a much
smaller fraction of the stock market than
they were 20 years ago. Governments. They are much
less active participants in Central Banks, in currency markets, and much less active
in speculative markets generally than has been
the case over time. There are more and more people who have removed themselves
from the possibility of being negative Alpha by indexing in one form or another and therefore
being zero Alpha, limiting the capacity for
others to earn Alpha. I would suggest
that the idea that for institutional
portfolios as a whole, there is more Alpha to be had than there once was is
very unlikely and in fact, the widespread adoption
of the Yale Model, for example, the widespread
use of alternatives. The fact that the
easy pickings from the carry trade from
convertible bond arbitrage, from collecting premiums on options have become widely
known and exploited, would suggest to me
that in all likelihood, the availability of Alpha has been very substantially
attenuated over time in ways that have
not been fully matched by the declines and the fees of alternative
asset managers. Similarly, the willing supply of illiquid assets has surely
not expanded nearly as rapidly as the demand for liquidity premium through investments in private
equity funds, suggesting that some research at Harvard a couple of years ago suggested that the premium the private
equity can earn over levered public equity has surely come down
substantially over time. In some lower risk premiums more likely than
not, less Alpha, substantially more
likely than not, lower safe rate by 200, 300 basis points, certain, seems to me that it is basically impossible to escape
the conclusion. If you are systematic in your thinking that if
nothing else has changed, payout ratios should be
far less or expected return assumptions in
pensions should be far lower than has been
the case historically. Why might I be wrong? Actually, I don't
think I'm wrong. But here would be
arguments I can think of in support of the view
that I was wrong. One, well, maybe this is
all happening but actually returns for the last few
years have been terrific. That is exactly what you
would expect if we were in a transition to
lower required returns. Exactly what you would
expect is a recapitalization of lower discount factors and those gains represent a
pulling forward of returns, not an increase in returns. For those institutions
who think that a large part of their revenues
are yet to be earned, they are poorer, not richer as a consequence of the
developments that have driven increases
in asset prices. The fact that the news has been good for the
last few years, I would argue is a corroboration of the views I have expressed, not a reputation of the
views that I have expressed. A second theory would be, this is all interesting and all that but actually everybody was taking too little risk before
and these developments have driven them
to take more risk. Now they're going to
take more risk and therefore they're going to
earn higher returns and it's really going
to be okay to be taking more risk because after all the risk of
all mean revert in the long run, because it will, and they're really
long-run institutions and it's all fine. Maybe, but I don't think
the evidence in favor of mean reversion has particularly gotten stronger over time. I'm persuaded by the evidence some deep sense there is
mean reversion in markets. There's also evidence
that there are long-run changes in
expected returns, long-run changes in
expected variances. From the point of view
of a single investor, one should not be confident that the variance of the return over 20 years is lots different than 20 times the variance of
the return over one year. People might have been
making a mistake in taking too little
risk 20 years ago but there's nothing
particularly in the fundamentals to
suggest that was the case. It would be unlikely if all institutions
of all kinds were taking more risk than
they were 20 years ago. A third possibility is
that we're headed to some Eldorado of high returns to capital that are going to
be created all of a sudden, out of all the
splendid things that artificial intelligence
is going to bring. Here, it's important to remember that the average return to the capital and the
marginal return to capital are something
different and what markets price is the marginal
return to capital. Precisely because
the investments are so fundamentally cheap, due to Moore's law, it seems more likely that marginal returns
will be reduced, then the marginal returns
will be increased. I would put it before you that the correct view that roughly no institution
in the world is acting on is either to explicitly acknowledge that there earlier thinking about payout
ratios was wrong and that they should have been
paying out more in the past, or to believe that the payout ratios on which they are currently operating are excessive and that
this ought to be a larger and more active subject of discussion in the endowment, pension, and institutional
investment world than it is. 